



>*■


2>d











REALITY AND TRUTH





REALITY AND TRUTH
A CRITICAL AND CONSTRUCTIVE ESSAY
CONCERNING KNOWLEDGE, CERTAINTY, AND TRUTH
JOHN G? VANCE
M.A. (Cantab.), Ph.D. (Lov.)
MEMBER OP THE BRITISH PSYCHOLOGICAL SOCIETY
PROFESSOR OP PHILOSOPHY AT OLD HALL
ov yap 3)} ey»y^ ■-•<» olSa oAX* amf av & k6y0t
Ctairtp wv«vfj.a 4,tpfl Tavrfl Iriav
—Republic, III, 394D
LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.
39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
FOURTH AVENUE & 90th STREET, NEW YORK
BOMBAY, CALCUTTA, AND MADRAS
1917





V'
)
[De&fcatlon]
TO
T.
AS A LITTLE TRIBUTE
OF
DEEP AND LASTING AFFECTION
33C007





PREFACE.
For many years it has been my great desire to give to
my fellow-countrymen, and, if might be, to the English-
speaking world, a critical but definite treatment of the
foundations of knowledge, truth, and certainty. No pro-
blem could conceivably be more insistent or more urgent.
Like the piles that are driven deep below the surface of
the water, unseen but necessary supports, the theory of
knowledge upholds all. Whatever we attempt within
the whole vast range of the theoretical or practical
sciences, all depends ultimately upon our solution of the
problem of knowledge. Thus whether we are interested
in theology or natural science, in speculative philosophy
or social work, in politics and economics, or art and
literature, matters little When one man sets out to
think or two set out to agree upon some idea or plan,
they invariably rely upon some accepted view of the
limits and possibilities of our knowing powers, and al-
most invariably they differ. We all have some working
theory of knowledge, however ill-defined and inarticulate.
And there lies the danger.
These rough and ready philosophies of traditional
acceptance, in which "ideas," "intuitions," common
instincts, widespread fallacies and a robust sense of
reality play their part, are often strangely indefensible


viii PREFACE
in matters of detail or even in broad outline. The
systems of the schools may be even perverse. The in-
evitable result follows. In whatever we touch, difficulties
and clashing diversities come to light with disconcerting
rapidity. If we only plan the removal of a village pump,
we find that the Sceptic, the Dogmatist, the Critic, the
Intuitionist, and the Cynic will appear in our midst as
from a thunder-cloud. If we attack a difficult problem
in metaphysic, we hear at once the same chorus of
voices; only the language is rather more stilted and
less intelligible. It is above all things necessary, there-
fore, to make a thorough and energetic inquiry into the
nature, scope, and possibilities of human knowledge. Of
all the questions in philosophy, it is the most actual and
the most enthralling. It is also the deepest, for in this
study we touch the ultimate foundations of the whole
fabric of reality and truth.
In this volume I have attempted to lay bare the last
supports on which everything must rest. The questions
are deeply technical, but at the same time of such abiding
interest to all thoughtful men, that I have deliberately
laid aside the technicalities as well as the useful but
inhuman jargon of the multitudinous schools, in probing
and establishing this doctrine of Critical Realism. This
vision of the problems and their solution depends upon
no name, no tradition, no authority, no assumption, no
postulate. It stands or falls by its own intrinsic argu-
ments, and by the plain facts which tell their own tale.
For the rest I have endeavoured to set forth the whole
sequence of ideas with all the clearness and precision of
a geometrical proposition; while, as a lover of English,
I have tried to remember the suppleness, wealth, and
beauty of our language. There is little enough reason


PREFACE ix
why clearness in thought and structure should not go
hand in hand with concision, simplicity, and grace of
expression.
In general it will be found that the conclusions of
our study are both precise and satisfying. Starting from
nothing at all but the unceasing whirl of conscious events,
we are led step by step, as we follow the facts, to see that
there exists a real world of which we can have ample
scientific and philosophic knowledge. Indirect as that
knowledge must ever be, it is none the less secure. The
foundations are of rock-like firmness. The theory of
Kant which during the last century has dominated so
many systems and inspired others is here laid aside.
Judged by a long and systematic trail of positive fact and
argument, that theory fails. On a closer internal scrutiny
it loses all compelling power. Not until the whole cri-
tique of the Konigsberg philosopher has in turn been criti-
cized and rejected, shall we at last lay the spectre of the
Humean scepticism, which has stalked abroad too long.
This is my deepest conviction at the close of this study.
My affinities in philosophy are not with Germany but
rather with Greece, "whence the light came," and with
England for its fine if somewhat confused appeal to
experience.
I have written to defend no cause, to support no claim.
My only object has been to conduct a faithful inquiry,
without prejudice or polemical purpose; and, as the results
are satisfying beyond all anticipation, to communicate
them to those who have felt the sting—and who has
not ?—of these fateful, "anguishing" questions.
In these days when men speak much of reconstruction
in so many different branches of our social, political,
economic, religious life, when great efforts are being made


x PREFACE
and new energies loosened, when mighty movements
calling for heroic adjustments are sweeping us rapidly
in a new future, when the ancient fabric of things has
been shaken by the disasters and upheavals of these un-
steady, whirling years, it may be well to pause and in-
quire, how far our knowledge is signed with the seal of
truth. A bad principle, worse a thousand times, whether
it be speculative or practical, than a bad action, may
poison the wells of mankind for many years. An insecure
or erroneous theory of knowledge, in which all the powers
and possibilities of human thought are finally discussed,
may be a disaster of the first magnitude. I would there-
fore commend to the attention of all who perceive the
splendour, the fatefulness, the terror of these days of new
beginnings and new schemes, this review of the facts of
knowledge. Truth is indeed attainable, but only at the
cost of much care and perseverance. Not by sudden in-
tuitions, not by simple all-inclusive systems, not by
violent reactions comes " penetration " of any " mystery"
nor solution of any difficulty.
In conclusion I must own—I would that I might
discharge!—my indebtedness and offer my thanks. To
the friend to whom the book is dedicated, without whose
help, encouragement, and loving interest, it might never
have been written, I offer my very cordial thanks. Next
I must thank my former master and distinguished col-
league, Dr. Alfred Herbert, M.A., for his unfailing
kindness and affectionate encouragement. He read all
the book in MS.—I am not a very legible writer—and
offered many useful suggestions. But above all I am
sensible of the effect produced by his calm and generous
appreciation of the work as it grew. The writing of
many of the chapters was made both joyful and easy by


PREFACE xi
his encouraging words. To my distinguished friend Dr.
William Barry, and to Canon Burton, kindliest and best
of men, I offer my grateful thanks, while I cannot pass
over the names of my great friend, the Rev. Edward
Myers, M.A., of my brother Frank, nor of my former
pupil, the Rev. Arthur Reys, who checked the MS. with
such good-will and diligence.
Rugeley Camp, Cannock Chase,
19 September, 1917.


CONTENTS.
Prbfacb vii
CHAPTER PAOE
I. The Realism of Plain Men i
II. Scepticism ...' 20
III. Dogmatism 47
IV. Descartes and the Critical Method .... 66
V. Rational Doubt and its Results 86
VI. The Existence of a Real World 115
VII. Our Grasp of Reality 143
VIII. The Validity of Knowledge 167
IX. The Nature and Scope of our Knowledge . . . 193
X. Certitude and Truth 216
XI. The Kantian Theory of Knowledge .... 246
XII. The Kantian Theory of Knowledge: A Criticism and
a Parallel 273
XIII. The Possibility of Science and Philosophy . . . 295
Index 321
xii


CHAPTER I.
THE REALISM OF PLAIN MEN.
We are all born with an unconscious objective bias which
leads us to consider " things " long before we think of ourselves.
Our sensations, our thoughts, our inclinations and desires all
seem to point outward to a world of real things which differ
from us, the spectators, and from one another in a thousand
ways that baffle summary description. Spontaneously, in-
tuitively, we grasp, or fancy we grasp, a world of multitudinous,
complex realities, rivers and fields, hills and valleys, buildings,
animals, flowers and trees, men and women. Probably long
before we had learnt to grow accustomed to the limits of our
own body, when, in the early bewilderment and wonder of
babyhood, we knew neither who was who, nor what was what,
we had an awareness of somebody—a mother or a nurse—who
formed a centre of attraction. Tennyson expressed this
"buzzing confusion" of our early days in the well-known
lines:—
The baby new to earth and sky
Has never thought that " this is I".
But as he grows he gathers much
And learns the use of " I " and " me,"
And finds " I am not what I see
And other than the things I touch ".
Moreover, true to this first type of apprehension, this reaching
out towards somebody or something coupled with a blissful
unawareness of our tiny selves, we seem destined to muse
i


2 REALITY AND TRUTH
about the variety and changefulness of the external world
for many years, before we ever dream of turning our thoughts
inward. In these early days, we seem, as it were, lost or
merged in the scheme of external things, scarcely aware of our
own kaleidoscopic consciousness; and during these days,
apparently, there is formed in our minds a theory of thought
and things which goes by the name of "crude realism ". The
bent of our own thought, and the pressure of received and con-
secrated opinion, converge and impel us to accept this naif
philosophy.
The things which interest us are coloured, and with our
curious pertinacious bias, we attribute the colour, without
further question, wholly to the object as though it lay like
some enveloping veil over an unseen reality. In the light we
see the colour, while in the dark it is shrouded from our eyes.
One has only to strike a match, however, to perceive that "it"
was really "there" all the time. Sounds too, which delight
or annoy us, are thought of as realities, which are carried
through the air, in some curious way, to our ear. We find
no difficulty in discussing the sounds that break the stillness
of desert islands. If we are within earshot, we hear: if not
the sound—none the less a sound on that account—passes un-
noticed, as the tick of a watch under the pillow of a sleeper.
Again, many of the things in which we take a not incon-
siderable interest have tastes. Immediately we fly to the con-
clusion that the taste exists in the thing, like so many grains
of salt dissolved in water. And so we might, if necessary,
run through the remaining typical sensations to recall how
"solid " and "objective " they are all supposed to be. In our
early years none of us have any idea of the part that we ourselves
necessarily play in the make-up of our own sensations, and
even in later life only very few of us attempt to adjust our
first impressions. We are convinced, in fact, that we have
nothing whatever to do with the making or unmaking of the
things around us. We merely apprehend them when they
stimulate and produce representations within us. That is all.


THE REALISM OF PLAIN MEN 3
Space, we figure to ourselves, as a gigantic receptacle of
all matter, and time we usually imagine under the form of a
flowing river. We rarely stop to question the validity or
meaning of this tyrant imagery. As for our belief in the
existence of a world of things possessing colours, tastes, scents
—the world, that is, which lies enmeshed in the net-work of
space—we never even bring it into question. Indeed, most
of us would scout the question as sheer madness. And if, for
a passing moment, the problem happened to strike us by some
freak of fancy, we would solve it without any hesitation by
seizing and grasping something near us. The pressure and
the contraction of our own muscles would speedily reassure
us. What we can push and pull seems to us pre-eminently real.
Our natural objective bias betrays itself in a strong and almost
pathetic belief in the muscular sense as a touchstone of
reality. Thus the things which we have seen or heard,
touched or tasted, are "known" to exist. The conviction for
the majority of men is ultimate—in fact, just as unquestionable
as the companion belief that things are just what we know
them to be.
But this set of beliefs by no means exhausts the consequences
of our wild ingrained sense of realism. Things unseen are easily
assimilated to things we know, and are thus made the subject of
any number of categorical assertions. Some little Italian town
with its cathedral, palaces, and ruined walls, though never
seen by us, is readily imagined. It is like Pistoia, Viterbo,
or Lucca. What more need we know? And so, with our
untamed and sometimes even riotous imaginations, we embrace
the wonders of East and West. Then, too, there are the
unexplored and even undiscovered regions of the Earth, such
as certain tracts of the Polar regions, parts of the mighty
Himalayan trough, or the upper reaches of the Amazon river.
They, however, present no difficulty. They "emphatically"
exist, and are even pictured, sometimes with no lack of vivid-
ness, by our unconquerable imaginations. Who would question
their reality? Why trifle about the obvious fact that they


4 REALITY AND TRUTH
have not been explored? Clearly we know enough, and
later may know more.
The same attitude of mind is found not only in the dis-
cussion of things unseen but also of things invisible. What,
for instance, has the naif realist to say about the vital prin-
ciples of the vegetable and animal kingdoms, and what of
the human mind? Say? Why he talks of them all as fear-
lessly and fluently as if they could be weighed and measured.
Indeed, he stands aghast at our pedantic wonder.
"After all," we murmur, "the upper reaches of the forested
Amazon may yet be discovered; but no man has ever come
face to face with a vital principle or a human spirit. They
cannot even be imagined; for visual and tactile images are
limited to things in two or three dimensions, which exist 'in
space and time '." We are prepared even to warm to the dis-
cussion; but find the naif realist smiling at our "bookish,"
"theoretical," " metaphysical" way of treating a plain matter-of-
fact issue.
"Your difficulties," he may say, by way of explaining the
smile, "are like so many spider's-webs which shrink and fall
in a rain-storm. Human souls exist. They are spirits, not
matter: they inhabit the body and give it life. Unseen,
unfelt, they are the great abiding realities in a mysterious
world, part spirit, part matter." One is left musing, asking
oneself if there is any limit to this triumphant sense of reality
and objectivity.
By way of answer, one hears of mathematical unity, which
never did or could exist on land or sea, or anywhere outside
of the mind of a man, being treated in its turn as if it were as
real as a continent; of surds and irrational numbers, which
lie far beyond the pale of human comprehension, but which,
in spite of all that, are played with in mathematical problems
as though they were as real as the knights and pawns in a
game of chess; and lastly of points and lines and other strange
dreams of geometers, which are taken with the same seriousness
as scientific fact or philosophic theory.
r


THE REALISM OF PLAIN MEN 5
If anything were required to reduce us completely to silence,
we hear of contingent or imaginary "facts," of what would
have happened if Marathon had been lost by the Greeks, or
if the Reformers had never stirred the thought of modern
Europe. If we say "but isn't it just a little . . .," we are
interrupted with the remark "the knowledge of course is
a priori, but none the less extremely valuable ". The remark
is sufficient to start a long meditation, on the suggestionability
of men, and the strange, hypnotizing power of certain words
and phrases which seem to veto all discussion in the joint
names of science and philosophy. . . .
And so we might continue to review the tenets of this
wonderful, and even magical realism of plain men. The past,
the present, the future, the future which never will but which
might have happened if some impossible or unsuspected con-
dition had been fulfilled; things seen or unseen, visible or in-
visible; things calculable or incalculable, possible or impossible
—all are embraced by the mind of the naif realist, and ac-
corded a " real," " solid," " objective " value in his all-embracing
scheme. It is at least a "muscular" phildsophy, and strange
though it appear, we are most of us inclined to follow the
muscular school of reality and truth. Indeed, a ballot taken
among the shrewdest and most thoughtful minds of our own
day, would bring in an overwhelming majority for this realism
of plain men.
Now there is, of course, in this " robust sense of the human
race," much that is true, and unfortunately much that is
wholly indefensible. As we hope later in this volume to sug-
gest a positive, constructive, and realist solution of all the
outstanding epistemologicalJ problems, it will be well to face
all the difficulties, great and small, from the very beginning,
with fearlessness and candour. The easiest way for our pur-
1 The theory of knowledge has many different names. It is spoken
of as epistemology, criteriology, critics, major logic, material—to distin-
guish it from formal—logic, and the rest. Whatever it is called, it dis-
cusses the problems of knowledge, certainty, and truth.


6 REALITY AND TRUTH
pose lies in the critique of this world-wide realism. We shall,
moreover, criticize and even destroy the main positions with-
out suggesting the existence of a second line of defence. Our
object at this stage will not have been achieved unless we
manage to cast doubt on the realism of plain men, and indeed
on every other variety of the same theory. We must endeavour,
in other words, to lose touch with our wild sense of reality
and objectivity, in order that we may fully grasp the most in-
sistent of all the problems and difficulties in philosophy. If
we have faced the difficulties once in all their intricacy, we
shall finally be in a position to maintain a rational, purified,
realist solution. It is necessary to awaken ourselves from our
"dogmatic slumber," and it is well sometimes "to bewilder
oneself methodically ".
Let us, then, consider the difficulties one by one.
Variations in Shape.
I. Any single sensation, thought, or judgment, or any con-
viction or belief of whatsoever kind, can be made in a moment
to bristle with epistemological problems. We choose, then, to
take a very simple set of observations as our starting-point.
As I write, leaning forward in my chair, there lies before me
a desk of polished walnut, with a flat, oblong surface like a
table. Let us concentrate our attention on the surface. Our
realist friend finds no difficulty in summing up the situation.
One glance at the desk is sufficient to assure him that the
top is rectangular, and that its colour is of polished walnut.
But as I move my chair from point to point further away
from the desk, I observe that the top is for ever changing
its shape. Sometimes it looks like an irregular rhombus or
rhomboid, but more often like any irregular quadrilateral. It
is almost impossible to believe at any moment that the rapidly-
converging lines are parallel at all. Sometimes the near angle
seems acute or almost a right angle. A change of three paces
in my point of view turns it into something obtuse. The shape,
then, is never the same when seen from two different points,


THE REALISM OF PLAIN MEN 7
however near, and never by any chance rectangular. In fact,
to obtain the impression of a thing with four right angles, I
would be obliged to look down on my table from a not in-
considerable height, and even then to use an illusive imagina-
tion. Why, then, does the realist insist on saying that it is
rectangular? Why is this supposed to be the real shape, and
why is this rectangular impression selected rather than one of
the hundred others? Why does he insist upon its uniformity,
in defiance of the multiple shapes that dance in his conscious-
ness? Is it not rather arbitrary?
At this point we can easily imagine the robust realist break-
ing in on our reflections with the remark, "What dreadful
nonsense and what absurd questions!" "Use a T-square,"
he will say, "its angles are clearly right angles. Clamp the
T-square to the sides of your desk, at the angle points, and
show that it fits the angle of the table. In other words, use
your sense of touch. Obviously, it is a right angle. Why,
therefore, try to confuse a plain issue by citing the old well-
known differences in perspective."
The answer is a fair specimen of plain realism, and is based
on a number of crude and unwarranted assumptions.
"So the T-square gives us right angles," we reply. "How
do you know? Obviously it must be either by sight or touch.
If by sight, let us repeat that the T-square, like the angles of
the table, can be made to go through all possible changes
from an acute to an obtuse angle, by a simple change of a
few paces on the part of the observer. In fact, one of the
arms of the T may, if we take a continuous walk round the
object placed on the floor, be made to revolve about the other.
Why, therefore, single out the appearance of 90 degrees,
which is only one of many, and why discard all the others?
If, on the other hand, you rely upon touch, we can only ask
why you place such a pathetic belief in tactile sensations. Is
it just the primal belief in muscle? However, primal or
derivative, we must invite you to close your eyes and 'feel'.
By what standard do you judge 'the feel' of a right angle?


8 REALITY AND TRUTH
Moreover, you can make the T-square 'feel' acute or obtuse,
according to the mode and degree of pressure. If you place
two fingers lightly on the T, one on each arm, it may easily
seem obtuse. If you grip it hard, with the palm of your hand
pressed into the angle point, it may readily seem acute.
Which is it now, or rather, which does it really feel, acute,
rectangular, or obtuse, and above all, why?"
Thus, on second thoughts, the appeal to the T-square only
complicates matters, and yields two sets of problems instead of
the original one. One table is " bristly " enough without intro-
ducing a T-square. Besides, if it came to the point, we should
just as soon believe in the rectangular nature of the desk as
of the T. The difficulty is to find any trace of good reason
for either belief. No! the T-square is, after all, only a typical
subterfuge—one of many. To change the metaphor it is only
a wooden horse containing the old realist prejudices and
assumptions.
Variations in Colour.
Again, to return to our desk, the colour is enough to set us
musing. "Polished walnut" would figure in an inventory.
But as I look at my desk from any one point, the colours are
most elusive in their tint and variety, comprising, in fact, all
shades from a glaring white, where the light plays hard, to a
deep silky-brown. Then as I walk slowly and attentively round
my room, keeping my eyes fixed on this surprising desk, I
observe that no single streak of light or colour is stable. The
colour, apparently, is just as changeable as the form. As I
watch, the day-light fails and all the different colours soften
down to a neutral brown-grey tint, before losing their last
vestige of colour. I switch on the electric light. The whole
is coloured indeed once again, but all the shades and tints are
new. Now, which is the point of vision, and which the light
that reveals the real colour, and above all, why?
In a similar way we might proceed with our other sensations
connected with the table, one by one, and show that each is


THE REALISM OF PLAIN MEN 9
mysteriously and bewilderingly unstable. One other instance,
however, must suffice to prove our point, that the same person
can have widely-different sensations concerning what purports
to be the same object.
Variations in Sense of Touch.
Take the sense of touch, of what is often spoken of as "feel-
ing ". The case is interesting as "touch " is the last citadel of
the realist. I run my forefinger lightly over the surface of
my desk, and find it smooth. Why not, indeed, seeing that it
is polished? Then I press hard as I rub the same finger once
again over the same surface. This time it seems rough. I
look at it steadily and decide that it is really smooth—that the
roughness is a thing of my own making. Then I look at it
through a magnifying glass, and find that it is now a thing of
dots and dents, of tiny rocks and sharp edges. Now which is
my desk, rough or smooth? If it is really rough, then my
ordinary sense-perception is wildly wrong, and untrustworthy,
and probably the whole of my sensations will be found to lie
under the same sweeping condemnation: exit sensation as a
form of knowledge. If, on the other hand, my desk is really
smooth, then my vision, aided by a microscope which purports
to give greater accuracy and detail, is strangely fantastic. The
problem is obviously not easy. Is everything relative and
nothing absolute in a world of insecure and fleeting impres-
sions?
We shall not do the crude realist the injustice of making him
suggest "strike an average ". Averages are sometimes inter-
esting expedients, but here such a course is impossible. If, for
instance, we struck an average between the dozen most
characteristic colour-impressions, in order to find the real
colour of the desk we should be admitting, by our procedure,
that each of the impressions taken singly was wrong. If they
are all wrong an average will obyJQugl^ give us the average
error, and not the truth. We need not delay over an obvious
critique.


io REALITY AND TRUTH
Do Things Exist at All?
II. So far we have dealt with one difficulty. What is the
nature of the desk? or what is our real knowledge concerning
it? Now let us turn to something quite different. Apart
altogether from what the thing is supposed to be, how do we
know that it exists at all? How do we know not what it is,
therefore, but that it is.
"I see it," replies the plain realist, "see it and feel it fair
and square in three dimensions before me."
"No! you do not see it at all," we reply. "You have only
a shifting, sliding group of images within your consciousness,
which you, with your objective bias, attribute to something
outside yourself. If you only really grasp certain events or
processes in consciousness, why are you so profoundly con-
vinced that there is a real something outside to correspond?"
As a rule such questions only meet with hot-headed answers.
However, our realist may solve the difficulty by walking over
and bringing his clenched fist down on the desk. "There,"
he says triumphantly, "I felt it, and it ' felt' my blow, for I
can now see and feel it vibrating.''
Yet the simple truth is very different, however "clinching"
the answer may appear to be. He felt within himself a certain
number of muscular sensations—one cannot possibly have a
muscular sensation outside oneself !—when he is supposed to
have struck the table, and his sensations were accompanied
perhaps by certain feelings of pain. Afterwards he had certain
spinning, wavy images in consciousness, which he attributed to
the vibration of the wood. A supposed piece of wood has met
a supposed hand—for what do we know of our bodies or
members any more than of things "outside" us—they have
collided, it seems, and results are supposed to have taken place
in each. Possibly this interpretation may be excellent, but
it must be abundantly clear that it is all a matter of interpreta-
tion. This view, in other words, is a sufficient, but is it a neces-
sary explanation? All that we know, to. wit, all that we are


THE REALISM OF PLAIN MEN n
immediately given, is that one group of sensations, muscular in
kind, was succeeded by another group which turned out to be
visual. What is there, in the nature of my experience, which
drives me to infer the existence of a world of real things?
Apart from the question what a thing is, how do we know that
anything is?
The usual answer to the difficulty lies in the assertion of the
principle of causality, or some "principle of the sufficient
reason," which usually turns out to be a very insufficient
reason.
"Why trifle in this fashion," our realist may say, "about
things which are, after all, important. You will demolish
everything at this rate, and be left yourself at last, a chimera
gyrating in a vacuum. The thing is really simple. Every
effect must have a cause. You find the effect, in this case,
within your consciousness: the cause is the real object lying
enmeshed in the scheme of things. So, by using the scientific
principle of causality, you are led to see at once that things
exist."
If the matter were so simple, we should indeed welcome this
solution. But this principle of causality, usually stated by
plain realists "that, every effect must have a cause,"—whence
comes it? Who established it? It is, we take it, an interest-
ing and important human judgment, this principle of causality.
Why, then, is it so arrogant as to impose itself upon us un-
proven?
In any case, what are the possibilities of proving it? Either
by appealing directly to the mind and stating it as an analytic
certitude, or else, we suppose, by appealing inductively and
synthetically to the unfailing human experience of cause and
effect. Unfailing human experience? But this presupposes
the very point in litigation, whether there be a real world at
all. To prove that a real world exists by appealing to the
principle of causality, and then to justify the principle by ap-
pealing to our experience of the real world, may be very
interesting, and even exciting: but it is not philosophy. We


12 "EALITY AND TRUTH
style this procedure a "petitio principii," and endeavour to
avoid it, as a typical and insidious fallacy.
There remains, then, only one possibility of justifying this
principle of causality, to wit, by an appeal to its axiomatic or
immediate character. But is it axiomatic? There is, indeed,
a widespread belief in the principle, just as there is in the
existence of a real world. But a widespread belief is not an
axiom, and, besides, are we not presupposing by our very
terminology "widespread," that persons and things exist, that
there is a real world? It all comes back, apparently, to the
vicious circle, whereby Proposition I is made to prove Proposi-
tion II, which good office is then reciprocated.
The applicability of the principle of causality to the events
of consciousness seems, in this way, to lose its compelling
power, since the principle itself needs some proof or justifica-
tion. But more remains to be said.
Even if we grant the validity of the statement that every
effect must have a cause, why must we assume without further
proof that the cause is necessarily an object, a real objective
thing? Why rush off at a tangent and thus assume the
truth of our native, realist prejudices? Might not the cause
be something quite different, some Energy, or Force, or Spirit
—something wholly unlike the supposed real world? Why
are all these possibilities so summarily dismissed? To these
questions the ordinary realist has no answer. His whole
"proof," and its guiding principle, turn out to be little more
than a dogmatic assertion of a belief that has never really been
scrutinized.
Before passing from this difficulty, we may raise one last
point. Even granted that we are impelled to think of some-
thing existing outside us, when our consciousness is besieged
by visual, tactile, and other sensations, why do we suppose that
the objects persist when the sensations have disappeared?
Why, for instance, should I think that my desk "continues"
to exist during my sleeping moments, when neither I nor
anyone else with eyes sees it? Naturally, if I wander along


THE REALISM OF PLAIN MEN 13
to my study during the night, I may find my desk, see and
"feel" it once again. But what makes me so sure of its
persistence throughout the night while I gave it no thought?
By way of answer, we may be told that the only alternative
explanation of supposed appearances and disappearances, of
entrances and exits from the scheme of things, is too fantastic,
a mere game of "hide and seek" with reality. But this is
only a reassertion of the old, objective bias. Why does any-
one ever think that anything exists? And granted that he
may have some excuse for this pleasant fancy, when he stands
"in presence " of something, what trace of reason can he give
for his persistence-theory? Is it not rather a strangely un-
warranted assumption?
Do Persons Exist at All?
III. The third difficulty is really only a corollary of the
second. If it seems impossible, not at first sight, but on
second reflection to establish the existence of an extra-mental
world of inanimate things, the same difficulty is applicable to
the case of living persons. Why are we so convinced that
people, men, and women, exist?
We say that we hear "their voices": strictly, we have a
number of auditive sensations which we attribute to a sup-
posed person. We see "their faces": strictly, our visual
imagery presents us with a certain group of pictures. We
grasp "their hands "—the old, muscular argument: strictly,
we feel a number of muscular contractions and relaxations,
which we "rush off" and attribute to the hand of another
person. Yes! but we play with "their minds," it may be said,
and thought answers thought. So it may seem, but the plain
facts are not charged with this elaborate theory of reality.
All that we know or think comes to us through the senses,
and sensations, after all, are events that proceed in conscious-
ness. The supposed thought of a friend is conveyed either by
a "look "—all that we register is a visual impression—or by
the sound of a "voice," which is nothing until it rings in


14 REALITY AND TRUTH
consciousness. All that happens to me of which I have any
knowledge proceeds then within the domain of conscious aware-
ness. Why, then, do we obstinately affirm that persons exist
outside and independent of consciousness? As the old principle
of causality cannot be invoked, we are left on the tip-toe of
expectation, waiting for a reason that is never given.
And if we may legitimately doubt the existence of other
persons, what of ourselves?
Somehow at this point, we think we hear the cry of the
plain man: "Do not," he pleads, "do not analyse our own
personal reality away into psychic events. Leave us at least
ourselves, even if all else is a dream, and other 'people' no
more than striking impressions in a dance of phantasmata."
Yet, however regretfully, we must proceed. What do we
know of our supposed selves? I look in a glass, and see a
face: a visual image, no less, no more. I lift my voice and
hear—just a sound. I feel "my" arm, and the result is a
muscular impression. I look outward, inward, upward and
find no more than sensations, feelings, thoughts, desires, or
imagery of some kind—all psychic events at best. What am
I to myself, in fact, but an ever-changing group of psychic
occurrences? Why should I think of integrating these fleeting
phenomena into a personal self, any more than I think of in-
tegrating those fragmentary associations, ideas and images of
"my" sleeping moments into a something? What do I mean
by a "self" or "myself," anyhow? And how do I know, or
think I know, that such a self exists?
The plain realist is ill-equipped for answering these rather
more searching questions. Once deprived of his " strong-right-
arm" argument, and of his violent use of the principle of
causality, he is reduced, as a rule, to incoherent repetitions, or
to language which is scarcely philosophical.
Possibly, then, these queries would suffice to awaken us from
our ultra-realist slumber, and to loosen our thoughts from their
moorings. But there remains, still, one big difficulty of con-
siderable importance to which we turn.


THE REALISM OF PLAIN MEN 15
Different Impressions by Different Persons of the
"Same Thing".
IV. Without pushing our analysis so far into the very pro-
blem of existence, the problem as to what things are, may once
again be put in a more acute form. We take our stand, then,
for the time being, with the naif realist, conceding for the
moment the existence of his reality—his world of persons and
things. We have seen already that I myself may have—
indeed cannot fail to have—divergent representations of the
"self-same" object. The divergence is so great, in fact, that
we are left wondering, what can be the meaning of " identity"
and of the term "self-same object". But that is not all;
though this multiplicity of representations would, alone, be
quite enough to provoke a long inquiry. Things are even more
complicated.
Different persons have different views and impressions of
the "same " thing. Get two artists to draw or paint a distant
object—a statue, or let us say, a thicket on a distant hill—
from two points which in view of the distance are practically
the same. The paper or canvas records traces of similarity
in an all-enveloping series of differences. If, then, the aqua-
relle or pencil sketch tells its own tale, what, we ask our-
selves, must be the uncharted differences of the living minds.
This is not, be it noted, a fact of the order, "two men love
what I hate," and cannot be waved aside with the comforting
remark "de gustibus ". It is something of much deeper im-
port. Two people see "one and the same thing" in very
different ways.
Language, moreover, may never reveal these personal
peculiarities, as people easily slip into the way of referring to
two divergent representations by the same term. If my friend,
for instance, always saw circles as ellipses, and if he always
called them circles, how could I, in conversation, ever discover
his secret? How many colour-blind people ever guess the
fact, and how many of their friends dream of the curious differ-
ences in their colour-vision? Provided the same name is given


16 REALITY AND TRUTH
to the same object, we go merrily on, without ever realizing that
no mind has ever sounded another, that words may conceal the
most clashing differences, that we may never know how others
see, or hear, or feel.
What, Then, is the Criterion?
Two people, then, have different representations of "one and
the same" thing. Who is to choose between the two? How
label one "valid " rather than the other, and, above all, why?
If the choice is not purely arbitrary, what are the principles or
criteria at work?
Now, as a rule, the realist gives one imperturbable answer
to all such difficulties. He is not disturbed: he admits all the
facts: he gives his canon or criterion. "That representation
is obviously valid," he says, " which corresponds with the reality:
all others are either partially right or wholly wrong." "Minds,"
he may proceed, "are like mirrors: if concave or convex they
give a distorted image: if straight and duly prepared they
give an adequate reflection of the object—they correspond
with reality." •
There must be few who have not heard this "rough and
ready" theory of knowledge, supported by the "mirror" or
some similar analogy. It is the simplest and easiest explana-
tion, that has found a multitude of prophets and disciples. In
it the whole of the crude realism of our childhood is condensed.
It presupposes, as we shall show, that we know more of the
"objective reality " than of the " reflecting" mind, and that we
can use our immediate knowledge of the thing in-and-for itself
to check the truth of the reflection—a splendid instance of
our spontaneous objective bias.
Though we are far from dismissing the whole correspondence-
theory as futile and impossible, we must at least see that in
this crude form it is wholly unacceptable. It rests on this
strange assumption, fit only for the psychology of fairyland, that
(i) we can register our mental impressions of reality; (2) leave
our minds and find our way somehow into the "arcana" of


THE REALISM OF PLAIN MEN 17
reality by some new process; and (3) finally return to our minds
to correct or adjust the first impression. Such voyages may be
made in Utopia, but never in this, the only world we know.
The " mirror " image or metaphor gives away the whole case.
In that parallel, the naif realist assumes that just as he can
compare the object and the reflection in a glass, so he may
stand outside the sphere of his own knowledge, and compare
one of its elements—" the reflection "—with the very nature of
things. It is, of course, a dream as we are bounded by the
limits of our consciousness, and have no power of peering
into the hidden reality of things. It is useless then to talk in
this free and easy manner of correspondence. "Correspond-
ence of what with what?" we may ask. It usually means the
correspondence of our representation with the actual nature of
the thing, which actual nature, apart from our representations
and thoughts, we must for ever ignore. Like many another
theory its appeal is based upon one tyrannical image—in this
case, of a mirror. Is it not clear to all, that if minds are like
mirrors, then there is, for our realist friend, a world of things
confronted by a group %l mirrors 1. That is all. There is
obviously no mind to discuss the fidelity of the reflection: all
the minds are occupied already in doing their mirror-work.
They cannot play the double part of mirror and spectator,
which is precisely what the whole theory presupposes.
The " correspondence view" which, at first sight, seems to
answer so many difficulties, really sets up an impossible criterion.
How can we possibly know what the reality is apart from our
impressions and thoughts? And how can we possibly find out
if our impressions correspond with something, of which we
must by the constitution of our minds, remain totally ignorant?
If this were the only means of discovering the true, and sifting
it from the false, we might as well give up an impossible quest.
It would be better to resign ourselves quietly to our life in a
world of shadows, where truth would be a great though unattain-
able ideal.
We have, thus, considered the difficulties of our problem
2


18 REALITY AND TRUTH
under four main headings; the apparent impossibility of dis-
covering any stable knowledge about things; the difficulty in
believing that anything exists at all; the thorny question of the
existence of persons, selves, or self; and lastly, the apparent
impossibility of finding any criterion to distinguish between
valid and invalid knowledge.
Difficulties might be multiplied by invoking the recent facts
and theories of physical science, which tend, more and more,
to dissolve the real "hard" world of matter into ether and
charges of electricity. We shall, however, content ourselves
with this rough outline, as it will, we trust, show the utility and
necessity of some theory of knowledge, if we are not to be the
prey of every caprice and sudden fancy. From all the in-
numerable questions of detail, there stand out in this discipline
the following five insistent questions:—
i. Can we know and prove that there exists outside us
a real world of persons and things, to some extent at
least, independent of our consciousness?
2. Can we know the nature of that reality, not only
that it is, but what it is?
3. Can we discern valid from invalid knowledge—the
true from the false?
4. What is the criterion of truth, and of our valid
certitudes?
5. What is truth?
To all these questions we hope in the pages that follow to
give a critical, constructive answer. We prefer as a kind of
literary symbol to state our object in the form of questions
rather than of propositions which we "stand to defend".
Our work has been one of patient inquiry, undertaken with
the hope of discovering and grouping all the relevant facts,
without any desire to defend any particular proposition or to
support any cause. On starting our inquiry we were indeed
"outward bound ".
Moreover, we are more intent in the subsequent pages upon
answering the questions and supplying satisfactory and abiding


THE REALISM OF PLAIN MEN 19
reasons, than on criticizing other theories of knowledge. Those
theories abound in the history of modern philosophy, and in
the works of contemporary authors. The omission of a name
or even of an important work does not imply that it has been
overlooked, nor that it has not been carefully studied. It only
implies that, while perhaps we have profited considerably by
the study, we are anxious to liberate the theory of knowledge
from its history. Philosophy within recent years has almost
been strangled by its history. Briefly, our object is to write an
essay in philosophy rather than a history of opinion concerning
knowledge and truth.


CHAPTER II.
SCEPTICISM.
Of all the questions that we summarized at the close of the
last chapter, two stand out with luminous clearness for the
mass of men, viz. "What is truth?" and "How distinguish
valid from spurious knowledge?" They rivet the attention
and challenge the mind to respond. Probably there is no
thoughtful person who in some moment of heart-searching
has not felt the necessity of a definite answer. In order to
live we must breathe: in order to think we must be able to
build our knowledge securely "broad on the base of things ".
None doubts, therefore, that these problems are charged with
singular importance, both for life and thought, and every one
knows that solutions have been offered since men began to
reflect.
The multitude of theories concerning truth and knowledge
cannot be touched upon in any one work unless, perhaps, in
the history of philosophy. There we read of mighty efforts, of
many fruitless repetitions, and of the few periods of construc-
tive thought which have been followed sometimes by centuries
of eclecticism, misunderstanding, discouragement, and decad-
ence. Yet through all the confusing diversity of opinion,
and the roar of many voices, we may detect two great ten-
dencies which may be roughly classified as dogmatism and
scepticism. These "rubrics," of course, are very general and
necessarily cover multitudes of differences in judgment and
outlook: the main current of tendency is nevertheless clear.
Broadly the dogmatist is the man who sees no necessity in
pressing these fundamental questions, concerning truth and


SCEPTICISM 21
criteria, too far; who fears that the whole superstructure of
knowledge may "topple " if we burrow too near the founda-
tions; who, being certain of many things by temperament
and disposition of mind, cares little for the criticism or
justification of knowledge. In his heart he has a lurking
fear of scepticism, which drives him to give a summary, dis-
creet, constructive answer to the questions which he really
dares not face.
The sceptic, on the other hand, is one who adopts an
attitude either of unyielding hesitancy or convinced despair
towards all the problems of knowledge, truth, and certitude.
He has, as some one said, "a sort of hesitation of the soul,
as other men have a limp in their gait". He questions
all, finding the "salt of truth" in the "surviving query" and
the ultimate doubt. Sometimes he finds for answer only the
echo of his question and turns with resignation—for resigna-
tion is almost a characteristic of the sceptical mind—from all
constructive play of thought. Occasionally we peiceive some-
thing of the sorrow and bitterness of soul, something of the
paralysis of the mind that is felt in making the Great Re-
nunciation: but, as a rule, there is little disillusionment, little
vision of the human tragedy in the sceptic who shrugs his
shoulders at the vagaries of men. Sometimes he is argu-
mentative, critical, cynical, even a ruthless and bitter opponent
of all positive statement. In any case certitudes are things of
the market-place, not to be defended in the academies. Briefly
the sceptic is one whose faith in thought and reason has been
completely undermined. In a world of disappointment and
illusion, thwarted rather than helped by the angry discords of
the many teachers, we may never know what is true; though,
possibly, we may, either by dint of much labour or by the
acceptance of some convention, discover a way that may claim
some degree of probability. But the upshot of it all is clear.
"There is nothing anywhere but guessing."
Between the two extremes of dogmatism and scepticism,
there lie a vast number of theories which share something of


22 REALITY AND TRUTH
either or both. The most important within modern times is
that of Kant, who certainly shares both tendencies. In his
"Critique of the Practical Reason," as we shall see later, he
shows all the swiftness of judgment, the lack of hesitation, and
the determination to solve great problems at all costs—to cut
where he cannot untie the knot—which mark the dogmatist.
In his earlier work on the "Pure Reason," we find much of
the sceptics' diffidence and limitation of thought, not to speak
of his vision of the equal value of certain contradictory argu-
ments. Certainly few philosophers have ever attempted to set
forth and describe the ruin of our reason in dealing with ulti-
mate reality more forcibly than did Kant. Our own theory,
to which we shall turn at once when we have cleared the
ground, will be wholly critical in method. We start without
any desire to establish any particular set of propositions: we
doubt and criticize, and are finally led by the plain facts of the
case to establish certain conclusions.
Let us begin, then, with some account of scepticism, the
theory which stands in our way, bidding us relinquish any
hope of building a theory of knowledge. Its reiterated argu-
ments, which are often regarded as supreme wisdom, are
weighty: they must be met and answered. Naturally, from
the writings of ancient and modern sceptics, many challenging,
destructive propositions might easily be cited. A list of such
statements lies before us as we write; but we shall not choose
this more obvious method of criticism. If the sceptic com-
mits himself to any positive assertion, it is not difficult to
"hoist" him on his "own petard". But the real finesse,
the essence of his philosophy, is to be found neither in
boisterous criticism nor in categorical assertion. Its "soul"
is something far more subtle and fugitive—something more
akin to hesitancy and reluctance..
Now of all the philosophic schools, that of the sceptics is
the hardest to examine with anything approaching justice or
impartiality. If one is temperamentally given to hesitancy of
mind, to exaggerating difficulties, and to discounting everything


SCEPTICISM 23
that bears the semblance of proof, their arguments will seem
convincing if not final. If, on the other hand, one still guards
the hope that knowledge may not turn out to be a mere rope
of sand, that truth need not necessarily be unattainable, their
arguments will be found somewhat cavalier and a priori. In
face of the difficulty, we can only make an effort to be strictly
impartial. But as a matter of fact, when our examination of
the arguments and outlook is complete, we find that they are
sometimes almost as difficult to answer as the raised eye-brow
of a friend, or as the chilling silence that sometimes greets a
suggestion.
The Making of the Sceptic. The Scandal of
Philosophy.
Deep down, scepticism represents a desire to be liberated
from the tyranny of criteria, and from the search for truth. It
is an attitude of mind, an outlook on life and thought, or a
tendency which has constantly arisen in presence of great
opposing schools of philosophy or in the wake of some great
period of constructive thought. After the tension, the relaxa-
tion: after the effort of reason, the scepticism. Some have
felt that where the philosopher-princes differ and contradict
one another—not without violence—they themselves may be
forgiven for suspending judgment. Men, in fact, have grown
diffident in face of this age-long scandal of philosophy. Let
the philosophers agree, and then they will listen patiently.
Temperamental Hesitancy.
There is, in addition, another more intimate psychological
factor which goes to the making of scepticism. There are,
that is to say, many very penetrating, very delicate and nicely-
adjusted minds which shrink from committing themselves to
anything definite. They cannot cling tenaciously: they must
recoil. For them almost anything, "a sunset-touch," "some
one's death," "a chorus-ending from Euripides," will suffice to
dissolve their thoughts in doubt, to shake the foundations of


24 REALITY AND TRUTH
everything, and to set their minds dancing "round the ancient
idol—the Grand Perhaps ". They have no power of finishing
an inquiry, or of knowing when they have grasped the very
heart of anything. They cannot bring themselves to attach
values to modes of thought, or alternatives of conduct . If
they tether themselves to anything, they strain at the leash
until it snaps. Indeed, after some time, they come to regard
any definite, positive statement as an evidence of coarseness of
mind, as some departure from the neutrality of the wise spec-
tator. Such minds are even known to fret when a choice of
action must be made between clear-cut contradictories. They
desire supremely to regard each of the opposite courses with
all the aloofness of a spectator, judging, examining, approving,
criticizing, but never by any chance yielding to the temptation
of a determined choice. For such minds, some kind of scep-
ticism is the only possible philosophy.
The Desire for Peace.
In addition, however, there is an ethical factor which tells
in favour of this same tendency of thought. We naturally
long for peace of soul, and most of us are not endowed with
energetic, restlessly-inquiring minds. Now any assertion about
things that matter will almost certainly meet with strenuous
opposition. One army of facts will be ranged over against
another, and principle will be inevitably found to clash with
principle. The opposition will generate strife, and our serenity
may be lost in the passionate desire to defend some cause, or
to prove some theory in spite of everybody and everything.
Why run the risk of becoming a fretful partisan? Why not
relinquish the hopeless task of examining systems? Why not
forego the right to assert anything? Why not seek liberation
from the strife of opinions and the war of words in a delicate
poise of mind which entertains rival thoughts with equal
alacrity and sympathy? Serenity, it may seem, will thus be
acquired or maintained, and in addition, perhaps, a reputation
for wisdom. Why seek the glare of the light when the twilight,


SCEPTICISM 25
undisturbed by the polemics of the schools, of the politicians
or of the economists, is so enchanting? Why bother about
knowledge which must ever remain elusive and uncertain,
when a cultivated dilettantism will yield just that peace and
serenity which we all instinctively seek? There is a wonderful
calm, indeed a positive feeling of release, that comes to the
mind of a man who is certain—but not too certain—that there
is nothing to be known.
It is not for us in this work to summarize the eddies and
currents of scepticism throughout the centuries, an analysis
which would plunge us deep into the history of Greek and
modern thought. Let us content ourselves with an account
of the main arguments of its typical exponents.
The Confusion of the Philosophers.
I. The argument on which many fall back in moments of
difficulty is founded upon a review of the widely divergent
systems of different philosophers. Philosophy throughout its
long history has made little progress. The same problems
recur; the same facts are affirmed, neglected or denied; the
same principles are defended and rejected; and the old de-
bates concerning God, freedom, immortality, truth and certi-
tude, the origin of ideas, and the rest, still split the world into
opposing camps. No confusion could be worse confounded.
Aristotle held that the genesis of our thoughts with all their
peculiar characteristics could be explained by an appeal to the
world of things. Plato, on the other hand, held that the world
of things could not possibly provide more than a passing
stimulus, enabling us to revive the thoughts of some former
existence. Locke held that it was possible to form a general
notion or concept of a triangle—nothing determinate like the
equilateral or scalene variety—but just a triangle. Hamilton
calls Locke's theory a "revolting absurdity". Berkeley
affirms that he cannot possibly form this Lockean concept,
while others find both the concept and the theory obvious to
a degree. One school will hold that the soul is immortal:


26 REALITY AND TRUTH
another that there is no soul to be immortal. Numerous philo-
sophers affirm that our will is determined by our nature, char-
acter, temperament, environment or antecedents: others that
it is of the nature of the will to be free. Some affirm that God
is unknowable: others that our negative and analogical know-
ledge of God is not inconsiderable. Substances exist: sub-
stances could not possibly exist. Substances are knowable:
substances are inaccessible to our minds: substances do not
even exist. Among the philosophers of the inorganic world—
the cosmologists, and physical scientists—we find the same
bewildering confusion of voices. All is matter and motion:
all is matter and energy: all is energy, and matter is no more
than condensed energy: all is force. Everything is necessarily
active: everything is necessarily passive. Why continue the
list?
The truth of the sceptic's assertion is only too painfully
obvious. When he suggests that the complications are too
great to be ever disentangled, we may forgive his hasty judg-
ment. But when he goes further and suggests that each of
the philosophers has an equal right to his own conviction—
thus, that contradictory propositions are of equal value, at once
equally true or equally false !—we register a "non sequitur"
and protest most vigorously. However, let us give the main
arguments before proceeding to our criticism. For the
moment it will be clear that if this first argument were
sound, all our knowledge would be bankrupt, and all truth
impossible. If all that the philosophers have taught is to be
either equally believed or disbelieved, then, in either case, our
whole knowledge is a matter of sheer conjecture, a mere shot
in the dark. In that event there would be nothing left for us
but to pirouette mentally for the rest of our lives—a some-
what dispiriting and monotonous prospect. The poet was able
"faintly" to trust "the larger hope". But to trust without
being able to give a sober reason is scarce worthy of a man.
Besides, would not the "trust" be too singularly faint and
ephemeral to inspire a life?


SCEPTICISM 27
The Equal Strength of Opposing- Arguments.
SI. To this sweeping indictment of all our thought, there is
sometimes added an argument based upon the Protagorean
"isostheneia "—or equal strength of opposing arguments. It
is really nothing more than a reassertion of the first argument
in a shortened and more vivid form. Stated in full it might
run as follows: Every statement can be contradicted; every
principle challenged by a counter-principle; every significant
fact faced by another which tells in the opposite direction;
and lastly, every argument may be rebutted by a counter-argu-
ment of equal, convincing power. If, in passing, the "isos-
theneia " does not mean all this, it would reduce itself to a
platitude—that there is "much to be said on both sides "—
which is a useless instrument in the hands of a sceptic or
any other philosopher. Our intellects and reasons, thus highly
gymnastic and supple, are obviously unworthy of trust. We
would throw aside a compass which pointed north for a
moment, and then, without rhyme or reason, turned and
pointed south. For the same reason, our unsteady, cameleonic
intelligences must, however regretfully, be discarded as useless
instruments. With the shattering of the hope and pride of
intellect, we are left groping in the old unbroken, perpetual
darkness of the Cimmerii.
The Civil Feud between Sense and Reason.
III. Naturally if only these considerations were valid, no
further argument in favour of scepticism would be required.
They would have silenced all our batteries. But there are
two other arguments, the first involving those which we have
already seen, the second, a delicate rapier-thrust. The third
argument, then, as we have listed them, deals with the internal
discrepancies of our knowledge. Our senses often deceive us,
yielding appearances which are either wholly illusory, or which
are corrected by later sense-impressions. A tower seen from
the distance appears round: at close quarters it is seen to be


28 REALITY AND TRUTH
square. A rod held in the hand may seem straight: plunged
in water it appears bent at the point of incidence. Moreover,
the conflict is not restricted to the domain of the senses.
Reason, they say, is found to contradict reason. In presence
of the disposition of the world and of the order that reigns
among things—to quote the example of Sextus Empiricus—
we conclude the existence of Providence. But, when we turn
to observe that the good suffer, and the evil prosper, we deny
that a Providence can rule the affairs of men. Argument is
thus met by counter-argument, and our reason manifests its
discrepancies.
When we add that reason and sense are often at variance
—"manquent chacun de sincerite, s'abusent reciproquement
l'un l'autre," as Pascal so forcibly expressed it—we have com-
pleted the sceptic's vision of the insecurity and contradictori-
ness of our knowledge. "Quelle chimere est-ce, done, que
l'homme?" cries Pascal, after reviewing these considerations,
..." quel chaos, quel sujet de contradiction, . . . depositaire
du vrai, cloaque d'incertitude et d'erreur, gloire et rebut de
l'univers ". Not all the sceptics can vie with Pascal in vigour
of expression. They conclude, however, from the kind of
civil feud that proceeds between sense and sense, and be-
tween reason and sense, that all our knowledge is sealed
with the mark of deception. We would not trust a watch
that went now slow, now fast, indifferently, nor a rusty balance
that proved to be sometimes accurate, often false. So, in the
same way, the faulty, unsteady, contradictory nature of our
senses and intelligence leads us to doubt all knowledge. In
order not to be the dupes of this strange, unconscious trickery
of our own, we mark everything with a query, and thus find
ourselves in the ranks of the Sceptics.
Knowledge Cannot Discuss its Own Validity.
IV. So far the arguments have all turned on the insecurity
or discrepancy of our knowledge. The fourth and last is
something far more delicate, the sceptic's rapier-thrust at the


SCEPTICISM 29
very heart of his opponent. It is the most seductive of all
their pleas, as it endeavours to show the incoherence of any
effort to establish a positive theory of knowledge. Known to
the Greeks as 6 SiaAA^Xos Tpdiros, it is to be found stated with
brevity and penetration in the works of Montaigne.1 In order
to build a consistent epistemology we should be obliged, they
say, to sit in judgment on our own knowledge, or rather our
knowledge would be obliged to sit in judgment on itself. We
would thus endeavour to find a criterion of truth and validity.
But the criterion itself would stand in urgent need of justifica-
tion, while the supposed justification would, in turn, need a
criterion of its own. "Nous voyla au rouet," says Montaigne.
The dilemma, true, appears extremely awkward. Either we
must choose to move round in a small and very vicious circle,
establishing criteria to justify knowledge, which knowledge in
turn is made to justify the criteria, or else we must face the
awful prospect of an indefinite series of epistemologies. The
indefinite series, naturally, would try to substantiate each of
the successive criteria, as they mount back on the long road
to infinity. Now none wants to walk for ever in a circle, and
no living person, we submit, could face the possibility of more
than one epistemology. The dilemma holds good. Let us
therefore bury our hopes, and begin again without raising an
insoluble problem. Judged by the achievements of thoughtful
men, judged by its own intrinsic possibilities, philosophy can
yield no certitude. All that we have power to see is the
"straight-rod bent in a pool".
Criticism of the Sceptical Arguments.
Let us now attempt to answer these arguments which have
carried conviction to so many minds. Naturally our only
endeavour will be to test the truth of the supposed facts, and
to see if the general conclusion as to the total bankruptcy of
our knowledge flows smoothly from the premises.
1" Essais," Lib. II, cap. xii.


30 REALITY AND TRUTH
The First Argument, a Non Sequltur.
We begin with the sceptics' reflections on the chequered
history of philosophy with all its absurdities—the vigour of
the term must be forgiven—and all its inherent contradictions.
So far, so good. The facts cannot be denied. The history
of philosophy, in spite of many a wonderful chapter, is, in
some ways, a sad record of human ingenuity, bearing witness
to an almost unlimited power of aberration. But how, we ask,
can the sceptic turn from his judgment of philosophers to a
condemnation of all human knowledge? This abrupt transi-
tion merits a little scrutiny.
The fact of the errors and contradictions in philosophy
would remain an interesting and sombre fact, no less, no
more, unless something in the shape of a principle were found
to lift it on to the plane of generality. Facts must ever
remain a simple group of particularized statements, unless
some principle be found to assist in the natural effort to
generalize. Now the sceptics' principle is found, of course,
in the maxim, whether it be implicit or explicit that each
philosopher has an equal right to his own convictions. With-
out some such maxim they could only say that forty, fifty, or
sixty philosophers had erred, which in itself is no condemna-
tion of all knowledge. The heart and life of the argument is
the maxim. What, then, is to be said of it?
This principle or maxim has little or no compelling power.
It is not axiomatic: it is not a law of thought: it is not a
postulate: it is not even plausible. Indeed, we ask with open-
eyed wonder, how anyone could ever believe such a perverse
idea. Like the sceptic we find for answer only the echo of
our question. The simple truth is very different. So far
from admitting this strange maxim, we should rather say that
nobody, philosopher or whoever he be, has any right to hold
any unsubstantiated opinion. Opinions are not necessarily
sacred: they may be nonsensical. No philosopher and no
dreamer of dreams has any right to think that his theories are
anything more than hypotheses or tentative suggestions, until


SCEPTICISM 31
he has completed his research in verification. A theory, to be
of any permanent value—that is, anything but an inspiring
assumption—must be based upon a satisfactory and exhaustive
inquiry into all the relevant facts, and a thorough, critical
examination of the pivoting principles. Rapid intuitions, and
"solutions simplistes" must be abandoned in the ultimate
philosophic inquiry.
Now in this respect many philosophers have failed. They
have felt some conviction throbbing in their minds, some
idea, possibly, that came between darkness and dawn, which
seemed to consolidate and interpret a hundred fragments of
knowledge. Breathlessly, they have sometimes given their
synthesis to the world. Thus the maxim that philosophers or
others have each an equal right to their own opinions is quite
indefensible, and without this supposed principle, the whole
of the sceptics' first argument disappears into the void. We
are left with just our valuable and sombre collection of philo-
sophic errors—a list which we accept as whole-heartedly as
any sceptic. Briefly, the history of philosophy cannot possibly
be made to show that real knowledge is unattainable. Rather
it indicates that the quest is attended by many pitfalls, that
reason is not necessarily infallible, and that we are all liable
to error.
It is some consolation, moreover, that we can often determine
where the rival schools have gone astray. Some important
fact has been omitted or ignored: some supposed fact has
been asserted and afterwards found to be spurious: or some
fact has been given an undue emphasis, out of all proportion
to its real significance, under the stress of some prepossession
or prejudice. Possibly if the facts are sound, some leading
principle may have been misunderstood or neglected, or some
dubious principle has been ceded and made to bear much of
the strain of the argument. Sometimes—though this should
only be whispered!—the inferences themselves, just the ma-
chinery of the argument, show one or other of the old insidious
fallacies. Where error is eminently possible, and where these


32 REALITY AND TRUTH
typical errors are of frequent occurrence, it is both gratuitous
and indefensible to suggest that each philosopher has an equal
right to his conviction or to a hearing, or to say that all are
equally good or bad. The suggestion is even worse: it is
arbitrary.
The Second Argument, Arbitrary and Capricious.
Arbitrary, too, is the corollary, the famous principle of
"isostheneia "—of " the equal strength of opposing arguments ".
One has no right to assume any such principle uncritically.
To verify it, we should need to spend a long life, or a succession
of lives in scrutinizing, sifting, weighing all the opposing
arguments of the schools. No sane man would settle down
to begin this long inductive inquiry. To pass judgment a
priori, on the other hand, and to declare that all are equally
good or bad, is surely cavalier to the last degree. When Kant,
for instance, drew up his antinomies of the pure reason, and
endeavoured to show that the pure reason can prove con-
tradictory propositions concerning ultimate reality, he wrote a
highly unconvincing chapter which many regard as one of the
weakest sections of his critiques. Nol The way of the
philosopher is long, his task far from easy, and we suspect
that some of these "isostheneia " maxims have been invented
by those who either felt no inclination to face the labour of
an exhaustive review, or who, feeling the inclination, refused to
expend the necessary vital energy. Possibly it has sometimes
been a cry from the wilderness to prevent the philosophers
from waxing too pontifical. Who shall say? In any case it is
not easy to philosophize—to collect knowledge and to extract
wisdom—and to many minds a maxim like the "isostheneia"
must prove an excellent narcotic.
The Third Argument, The "Civil Feud" Not a Real
"State of War ".
The third argument of the sceptics is obviously not so
damaging to the cause of valid knowledge, and probably the


SCEPTICISM 33
reader will already have detected the flaw. Briefly, it states
that our knowledge is subject to much trickery and deception;
that a "state of war" or "civil feud " exists between our cog-
nitive processes; that therefore all should be abandoned. The
conclusion, it is clear, outruns the premises. We do not, of
course, dream of denying that sensations are subject to peculiar
and manifold difficulties, nor, for instance, that a tower thought
to be round from a distance may prove to be square. Simi-
larly, a straight rod undoubtedly may look bent in a pool. But
rather than fly to one inclusive condemnation of all knowledge,
would it not be wiser to suggest that perhaps some indispens-
able conditions of validity were absent in the chosen cases? A
certain degree of nearness to the object, varying possibly with
the range of the individual's vision, is not too strange a condition
to suggest for the accuracy of visual impressions. Nor, to think
of the "straight.rod," is it too fantastic to suggest that objects
should be viewed through one medium, air or water, but not
through both. We do not now hint for a passing moment that
any of our sensations are valid—that is the subject-matter of
our later inquiry—but we cannot see that th^ sceptic proves
their general invalidity by underlining certain well-known dis-
crepancies. Possibly we may be driven later to show that
sensations, if they are to be records of things, are subject to
severe and definite conditions of validity. Why does the scep-
tic "scamp" the whole inquiry, and condemn all our know-
ledge without a hearing? Is it not hurried philosophy written
in the service of his cause? In any case his prejudice stands
revealed. "Knowledge," so to speak, "is to be tried and
hanged."
A less precipitate view of an important problem might sug-
gest the following reflections. Sensation purports to be an in-
strument of knowledge. Now a flaw in a piece of work is not
necessarily due to the tool. The craftsman may, through his
own awkwardness or ignorance, fail to see the limits of the in-
strument's utility, or the conditions of its successful use. He
may use it clumsily; he may apply it, when something much
3


34 REALITY AND TRUTH
stronger should be employed; he may bend or break it in
attempting the impossible. Yet, if he be a bad workman, he
will probably blame the tool. Why, then, are all these un-
pleasant possibilities dismissed by the sceptic? By what right
are the " kangaroo " and " guillotine "—to use our old political
phrases—employed so ruthlessly?
We may raise one last point against the later part of the argu-
ment. "Reason," they say, "is found to conflict with reason.
We look: we infer. We look later: we infer differently. We
look at one group of facts: we draw an inference. We look
at another relevant group: we draw a different conclusion.
Therefore let us abandon reason." It may be perverse, but when
we ourselves look again at these same facts, we infer differently.
Our conclusion is not "abandon " reason, but " look before you
leap ". Once again we do not mean to hint obliquely that our
reasoning is necessarily valid; but merely that the chosen ex-
amples do not show its radical viciousness. It may happen—
who shall say ?—that after careful scrutiny, one condition of
valid inference will turn out to be a complete and exhaustive
study of all the relevant facts. Possibly, too, we may be led
to condemn all precipitate generalizations from special cases.
Sextus Empiricus, for instance, was not happy in his choice
of an example. He looked at the physical order of things and
inferred the existence of a Designing, Controlling spirit. He
looked at the moral order—the "sufferings " of the good, the
prosperity of bad people—and denied His existence. Might it
not have been better to survey both sets of facts before attempt-
ing a conclusion? No doubt a philosophy of "water-tight
compartments" might lead to flagrant contradictions in the
separate tanks. Besides, if in his wilfulness he had specialized
on the physical order, and established the existence of God,
might he not, on turning to the moral order, have queried his
gratuitous assumption that the condition of our lives must ab-
solutely reflect our moral standing, that "suffering" is neces-
sarily bad, and prosperity necessarily good? Where did this
strange assumption spring from?


SCEPTICISM 35
As usual, the facts adduced by the sceptics are most impor-
tant, and must be taken into consideration. Let us, however,
face all the facts, and thus avoid their rapid inferences and
sweeping condemnations.
The Fourth Argument; Escape from Both the Circle
and the Infinite Series.
The last "rapier" argument, the dilemma of the circle or
infinite series, turning on the inherent powerlessness of our
knowledge to examine itself, is far more subtle. Our knowledge
cannot scrutinize itself? The facts are worth recalling.
Our knowledge, whatever it be, true or spurious, is distinctly
limited, and by making the requisite effort, we can become
aware of its limitations and shortcomings. Moreover, to get
away from theoretical discussions, we do habitually criticize our
knowledge. A glass of spring water tastes sweet after I have
been swallowing a few grains of salt or something bitter. An
hour later, a glass of water taken from the same spring will
seem fresh but not sweet. Now, in order to decide what
taste the water really has, I do not need to undertake a
chemical analysis. I know without further ado that the first
taste was vitiated by the presence of an unfavourable condition.
I measure my limitation, and consequently grasp the defici-
ency. Rightly or wrongly—it matters little for the moment—
we think we can examine and adjust our knowledge. Again, let
us say that I "match " two pieces of silk by electric light, only
to find in the morning that they do not even harmonize. I do
not ask myself, "do they really match or not?" I know quite
well that they did match by the electric lamp, which is defec-
tive when compared with daylight. Obviously one of the
necessary conditions for judging the identity of shades by day-
light, to wit, the daylight, was absent. It may, of course, be
all an illusion, but we are convinced that we examine our
knowledge. Examples might be multiplied indefinitely.. We
frequently make a mistake, and afterwards correct ourselves
without further question.
3*


36 REALITY AND TRUTH
Now this fact is of capital importance, as it argues the
existence of two levels in consciousness, one the level of
direct and immediate apprehension, the other the level of re-
flection and of our considered judgments. Granted the
existence of these two levels—of two processes in conscious-
ness which differ from one another in kind—then Montaigne's
"rouet'' stands still, and his last sceptical argument is reduced
to silence. If our knowledge were all on one dead level, we
should be bound to adhere to whatever occurred to us in con-
sciousness unquestioningly, and Montaigne's argument would
be painfully true. But the "one dead-level " idea is quite un-
tenable, as our consciousness does actually possess that extra-
ordinary power of turning back upon itself in a recoil of
examination and criticism. We do not, of course, suggest that
the knowledge on either level is real or true. They may con-
ceivably be both fantastic: the fact remains that two levels
exist.
Thus no valid a priori "circle or infinite series" argu-
ment can possibly be adduced to show that the knowledge
of one level cannot scrutinize that of the other. In other
words, no mere, verbal argument can destroy the habitual
practice of everyday life. The famous dilemma, the stalking-
horse of ancient and modern sceptics, presented with all the
disastrous neatness and simplicity ol a purely verbal argu-
ment, is shallow and unconvincing. It trades with people's
forgetfulness of their own critical power of reflection. That
critical power remains and may possibly be justified in the
sequel.
With these words we close our review of the sceptics' argu-
ments. At close quarters they lose all their brilliance and
compelling-power, and assume an appearance at once shallow
and arbitrary; above all, they reveal a temperamental disinclina-
tion for real philosophic inquiry. The philosopher must do
much mining, burrowing, tunnelling: the sceptic is only a
cultivated dilettante. That he is arbitrary, we have seen. Let
us now briefly indicate his general inconsistence.


SCEPTICISM . 37
The Sceptics are Strangely Inconsistent.
In considering the sceptical arguments, we have discovered
at least three categorical statements, that philosophers have
all an equal right to their own opinions, that every argument
may be met by a counter-argument of equal strength, that our
knowledge cannot judge itself. If they lay below the surface,
it proved easy to unearth them. It must be noted, too, that
these three positive statements are the real "soul," the driving-
power of the three great "proofs ". Without them, those
arguments would be merely nerveless groups of facts and
ideas—a pile of statements and special cases, without any
power of telling for or against the value of knowledge. Thus
categorical statements have proved indispensable to the
sceptic, who forgets his own creed, his own canons, his own
reluctance, his "surviving query " and "ultimate doubt," and
all his habitual suspense of judgments, once he sets out to
attack the foundations and walls of the temple of knowledge.
The sceptic, in other words, when he turns to do anything,
becomes an unflinching dogmatist. A man cannot pirouette
mentally and argue at the same time. The sceptic thus
relinquishes his suspense, and incidentally his consistency;
seizes three broad, positive statements, and uses them as iron-
girders in building up a general theory which queries every
positive statement—and therefore its own iron-girders—as
suspect.
This charge of inconsistency need not be further pursued,
as in the past it has been the most obvious criticism. The
fact, however, is interesting. There always lurks in the
arguments and ideas of the sceptics, a little something, a
tiny nucleus of positive assertion. After all, they too must
obey the law of our minds: we cannot build upon shifting
sands.
What is the Sceptics Guide or Code in Practical Life?
So far we have stated and answered the destructive criticism
of the sceptics. Now, we ourselves, after answering their some-


38 REALITY AND TRUTH
what reckless charges, may turn to cross-examine. To get to
the root of the matter at once, we may as well ask one question
of supreme importance, granted their principles, what practical
guide in life can be offered? Men must live and act. They
cannot possibly pass their lives in one protracted suspense of
judgment, or in oscillating between opposing views. Every
now and again at least they must do something, unless they are to
pass their lives in one long coma. Whatever be their attitude
towards the structural efforts of speculative thought, however
vigorous their condemnation of any attempt to answer ulti-
mate problems, they must have some theory of life, implied at
least in their own practice, something to guide them in the
ever-recurring, necessary actions and decisions. Now in the
darkness of illusion and uncertainty, what practical guide does
the sceptic offer to his disciple? The disciple may ask the
question "What is the meaning of life?" He will receive for
answer the old question, "Who knows?" "que sais-je ". If,
however, he asks not, what am I to think or believe, but how am
I to live, how to act, what to do, and what to avoid, he will not,
if he is sane, accept any such answer as " who knows?" The
question is obviously urgent and must be answered.
Yet many of the sceptics, with surprising de'sinvolture, have not
even hinted at a solution. They have smiled at the vagaries of
men, at the noise and vigour of the philosophers, at certitude,
the "will-o'-the-wisp" of the schools. They have exhibited,
not without complacency, the finesse and poise of their delicate
minds, their aloofness from all the vulgarity of contention and
strife, from all the allurements of prophecy and discipleship:
but they have not seen the vital necessity of granting a "why"
and "wherefore " to the ordinary events of life. Such systems,
we maintain, may be legitimately suspected. Their authors,
who gave no guide for practical life, can never have realized
the extent of their own destruction, which leaves neither heaven
nor earth, neither hope nor thought—in fact, nothing but modes
of consciousness vibrating in the darkness.


SCEPTICISM 39
Seek for Probability or Follow the Local Conventions.
Two typical answers, however, have been given, one by
Carneades, founder of the new Academy, and his followers, the
other by Timon, Sextus Empiricus, and later by Montaigne.
Carneades, who embraced the whole sceptical code even to
a challenging degree, saw that a practical guide for life, for
necessary practical thought and conduct, was necessary. He,
thus, seeing the hopelessness of continued indecision, and the
impossibility of rational conduct if no reason or motive could
be sought or found, taught that men should seek in thought
and life what seemed most probable. Let them never fix their
hopes on what could only lead to bitterness and failure, to wit,
the unattainable, unknowable truth; but rather let them fix
and follow the highest probability. There is a certain attract-
iveness about this doctrine, a face-value of reasonableness and
wisdom which has commended it to not a few philosophers.
Have we not read in our own tongue that "probability is the
guide of life "? The thought is typical of one wing of the
sceptical forces in history, and might be traced most interest-
ingly through the centuries. The other school—of Timon in
the ancient world, and Montaigne in the modern—extolled
convention, the obedience to the customs and usages of our
environment. Montaigne—we seek to affix no label to the
brilliant essayist who wrote in so many different moods—sug-
gested that we should abide by the customs of our own country,
seeking neither to alter nor explain them. We quote a passage
from the delightful translation of Florio.1 "Me seemeth that
all severall, strange, and particular fashions proceed rather of
follie, of ambitious affectation, than of true reason: that a
wise man ought inwardly to retire his minde from the common
presse and hold the same liberty and power to judge freely of
all things, but for outward matters, he ought absolutely to follow
the fashions and forme customarily received. . . . For that
is the rule of rules, and generall law of lawes, for every man to
1 Montaigne, " Essays," vol. i. chap, xxii., " Of Custome ".


4o REALITY AND TRUTH
observe those of the place wherein he liveth." Montaigne, of
all people, is not blind to the bewildering diversity of customs
in the different centuries and different places. He loves to
recur to this very theme, of the strange lack of uniformity in
the smaller and greater usages of men. But his "rule of rules
and generall law of lawes" is none the less clear and uncom-
promising. Moreover, he is merely following, and expressing
in his own incisive way, the second great current of sceptical
thought, as applied to life and conduct. Of the two schools,
that of Carneades will undoubtedly make the wider appeal. We
may take a critical glance at each of the alternatives.
The "Local Conventions" Theory Exasperating.
The solution offered by Montaigne—we only refer to him
as an interesting and typical exponent of a school—seems
perilously unreasonable. Why, we ask involuntarily, should
we commit ourselves blindly to any code? Why, if there is
nothing that cannot be queried—"que sais-je?"—if there is
nothing that cannot be riddled with doubts, why should we
accept, without question, reason, or motive, the beliefs and
traditions of our people? Why this sudden worship of an-
cestors and contemporaries? B ecause, perhaps, like Coriolanus,
... Customs calls me to 't,
What custom wills, in all things should we do 't,
The dust on antique time would lie unswept,
And mountainous error be too highly heap'd
For truth to o'erpeer.
Is this the reason? But let us in our natural candour observe
that it is no reason at all, but only a dogmatic assertion of the
necessity. "Follow the customs of our ancestors!" The
formula sets us musing. How can I be certain that they exist
or existed? And "my" country too, what gives me this
quiet assurance of its compelling power? Does it exist?
Why should I not question the utility of every law and every


SCEPTICISM 41
custom, just as I was taught to query the truth of every
statement?
Why should I forego my own code to follow that of any
community? Why blot out my vision of personal pleasure
and gratification in favour of a code, which, like all else, is
shaken with doubts? Why should I not give rein to every
desire, and thus mould my life as I will?
These questions are reasonable, urgent, and even necessary,
if we are not to blind ourselves wilfully. We men ought not,
unless it is absolutely necessary, to behave as sheep who leap
and gambol for nothing at all with true "follow-my-leader"
instinct. If Montaigne and the other sceptics cannot give an
answer to our leading questions, they give us merely a
philosophy for sheep—a herd-morality, resting uniquely upon
the herd-instinct. Montaigne, with the imperturbable "que
sais-je?" has no reply, no defence, no reason, no canon. Like
all other sceptics, once turned teacher he becomes the worst
and most intransigent of dogmatists. He imposes upon all a
whole vast code of laws and customs, without ever granting
either himself or us the trace of a sober, lasting reason. It
is only an echo of the old story. If thought be a game of
chance, human conduct is a game of sheep.
Possibly the sceptic may answer that it saves trouble to
follow received laws and customs; that it prevents friction;
that men by following the usages of their fellows live peaceably
and avoid persecution. As a slender defensive plea such a
statement might pass. As a philosophic reason or ultimate
argument in defence of human conduct, it is clearly impossible.
One might even suggest that it is a cowardly if not a craven
outlook on life, this consecration of public opinion, and refusal
to reason or to think because of the possible antipathies of
men. In matters of practical indifference, it is easy to sur-
render one's judgment and to follow the lead of others. But
when interests are roused, when our vision of what we desire
is clear and precise, and when the desire itself pulsates vehe-
mently within us, shall we surrender our judgment then? In


42 REALITY AND TRUTH
such moments even the most timid and languid of men might
challenge the binding-power of laws and customs. If a man
were thus driven to throw down his challenge, he would need
something more by way of defence than the gaunt statement
that the laws bind because they exist.
For the rest, if the sceptic admits that his conduct is un-
reasonable, we can only agree with him. If, in spite of this
confession, he remains unmoved and serenely contented, we
must record our inability to guide our lives by a code which
is avowedly an unreasoning emergency-exit from the diffi-
culties that must be faced.
Many of the sceptics have maintained with ill-concealed
pride that their system liberated thought. A sceptic, they
say, is no vulgar partisan. He is free to roam over all the
fields of thought, free to admire and to sympathize with all
things, however contradictory; free, that is, as the winds and
waves and the birds that sing. We have heard this said, and
it may be so, but we observe that he is bound, under pain of
losing his sceptical freedom, to suspend judgment. He is
bound, that is, to forego all craving to know, to settle, and to
decide; to forego all our natural longing to fix a scale of
"values," that shall be a guide amidst the whirl of things and
the dance of circumstance. Even if there were only this severe
limitation, the freedom of the sceptic would be bought at a
great, indeed an exorbitant price. But in a system such as
Montaigne's, or of any other philosopher who preached "con-
vention," "custom," "tradition of our fathers," there is some-
thing far worse. Not only do they fail to liberate thought—a
swallow with clipped wings is scarcely "free " to fly !—but they
enchain life and practice, indeed the whole sphere of conduct,
with a strange absence of mercy. They would bind us to the
incredible extent of making us pass our whole lives in blind
obedience to an unexplained and inexplicable code. Such
"freedom" would be slavery. We should be free only to
hear the "clank" of our chain as we wandered, spirit-free,
within the confines of our "brazen prison ".


SCEPTICISM 43
Montaigne's suggestion, indeed the whole sceptical doctrine
of convention, is profoundly unreasonable and therefore un-
acceptable. They saw, these sceptical "conventionalists," the
necessity of establishing some theory of conduct. In face of
a desperate emergency, they built their theories, which have
no foundations, and which bear no scrutiny. They ignore the
dignity of our nature.
The Probability Theory Admirable but Impossible.
The alternative of Carneades—search not for the true, but
the probable, and follow the highest probability—is far more
attractive, and, at first sight, appears eminently satisfactory.
After all, we may reflect, this very method is indispensable
in ordinary life. We are frequently faced by uncertainty in
the affairs of every day. If the doubt persists, and if some
action is necessary, we sum up the "pros" and "cons" and
follow the line of probability, of the action which commends
itself most after reflection. Thus we all instinctively apply the
canon of probability from time to time, in making our decisions.
In fact, "doubt: reflection: probability: action " would seem,
in very deed, to be one of the guides of life. Now the doubt
of the sceptics is "all-embracing," leaving nothing untouched.
Why not, therefore, apply the normal code "doubt: reflection:
probability: action," to solve the sceptics' problem of conduct?
Above all, why should a sceptic, who acts in this way, seem
less reasonable than the rest of us, who are all forced to adopt
the canon of probability from time to time?
Why? The reason is very simple. There is no vestige of
a parallel between the two cases.
In the moments of doubt which occur in our ordinary practi-
cal lives, we—who are not sceptics—have at least a number of
fixed principles and laws of conduct of which we are absolutely
certain. Our doubt, therefore, turns not upon the princi-
ples themselves, of which rightly or wrongly we are certain,
but upon the application of the certain principles to the cir-
cumstances, or case in point. We undoubtedly weigh "pros"


44 REALITY AND TRUTH
and "cons ". Each "pro " and each "con " expresses some
certitude—the heart of each is the certain principle. If we
were not certain of the " pros" or of a particular "pro," we
should be obliged to weigh up the "pros" and "cons" in
its favour, to discuss all the arguments for and against each
statement, and each factor of our probability, and so on, as
we chased our doubt—or is it our temperament?—out along
the weary, never-ending road of uncertainty. No! each " pro"
and each "con" has a kernel of certainty, and, thus, every
probability of ours in ordinary life, which springs from the
balance of "pros" and "cons," is fixed and founded upon
some certitude.
The sceptic finds himself, awkwardly enough, in a very
different position. When he is certain of nothing, holding
himself aloof from any bias in favour of either of two contra-
dictory propositions, how can he possibly begin to find reasons
for or against a particular action? He starts, let us say, and
desires with all impartiality to sum up the "pros "and "cons".
So far, so good: the desire is excellent. First, he feels impelled
to inscribe a "pro" on his list, but if he be a real sceptic, he
will hesitate, lest, perhaps, he should commit himself to a
decision in a rash moment. With reluctance he turns to deal
with a first "con," finding unfortunately that there dance in
his consciousness only the time-worn questions, "What do I
really know?" and "How can I really know anything?"
Queries will not make "pros" or "cons "; they only compli-
cate, with all the old sceptical trappings, the very possibility of
a decision.
There remains only one of two alternatives: either to do
nothing—a difficult motto for practical life!—or else to act on
the dictate of impulse, in which case the supposed canon of
probability is thrown overboard and allowed to sink. Thus if
he is true to his own code, the sceptic will query everything as
he goes along, and finally arrive, not at rational decision or
probability, but at the wearisome reiterated question, with
which he started, "que sais-je?" There is only one way out


SCEPTICISM 45
of this dilemma—a leap in the dark performed by one who
knows neither "whence" nor "whither," neither "how" nor
"why ".
Obviously, too, if we wished to be insistent at the expense
of a vanquished opponent, we might taunt him with the
"isostheneia "—the equal strength of opposing arguments—
which prevents the first step on the road towards the longed-
for probability. But we refrain. Let one thing stand out, how-
ever, in high relief from these brief considerations. Probability
is impossible without certainty.
The doctrine of Carneades seemed hopeful, wise, attractive:
it is only impossible because of the professed absence of the
indispensable, basic certitude. Our summary then is sombre—
the darkest and most unrelieved that it will ever be our duty
to make in the study of philosophy. Of the two sceptical
codes which yield a rule of life—those which give no code
stand convicted of unpardonable levity—one is unreasonable
to the point of exasperation, and the other intrinsically im-
possible. Thus the most pressing question, how we are to live,
not what we are to think but what we ought to do, receives no
answer. The two emergency solutions—the desperate remedies
offered to meet a desperate necessity—crumble into nothing at
the cold touch of consistency. With this bankruptcy of reason,
reasonable action becomes impossible.
Philosophies, as a rule, set out to explain and interpret the
whole vast scheme of things, and to provide some code of action.
Scepticism interprets nothing, and can suggest nothing by way
of a moral code. May we not submit, with confidence, the
following summary? Its attack on its opponents is strangely
arbitrary: its own defence is weak and inconsistent. // is, in
a word, a philosophy of temperament and not of reason; an
attitude, a tendency, an outlook on the world, the cry possibly
of a mind that is overstrung, a revolt against the sureness
of the dogmatists, or the delicate rapier-stroke of a mind bent
on destruction: but never by any chance a reasoned scheme
of thought and life. Without reason, motive, or canon, this


46 REALITY AND TRUTH
scepticism may indeed be a menace, but not an insurmountable
obstacle to the philosopher bent on inquiring into the theory
of knowledge. The sceptic had best keep silence, knowing in
his heart why he is silent. His "philosophy " will not bear
the "dry-light".


CHAPTER III.
DOdMATISM.
After considering the philosophy of doubt and uncertainty,
the vacillation and compromises of the Sceptics, we naturally
turn to deal with the Dogmatists, who represent the great op-
posing tendency. They stand to rescue certainty at all costs,
violently if need be, and they, too, like the sceptics, cannot
brook the contradictions and lapses of the multitudinous
systems. Philosophers have said their say, and philosophers
have denied the saying. To a bewildered, almost scandalized
world, the dogmatist cries "Thus saith philosophy". His
attitude has much of the hastiness of those who turn from
"theory " to "practice," whose cry is not for thought but for
action. He will not pursue the path, the tortuous winding
path of question and difficulty. It may all lead he knows not
whither; in any case, he thinks that path leads from the light
into the darkness. Intolerant of subtlety, anxious that our
thoughts should not lead us out of the beaten track of certitude,
the dogmatist bases his philosophy, not upon reason triumph-
ing over doubt and difficulty, but upon our natural "realist"
convictions. His voice has something of the prophetic ring,
though he tries in vain to give it the unimpassioned tone of the
philosopher's.
He argues, indeed, but hurriedly, as one who is really too
busy for these "academic " discussions. Whoever solved any
question by debate or dispute? His theory carries with it, too,
something of the inspiration, something of the enthusiasm of
one who feels a divine commission to liberate men from their
doubts. He enters the lists against the sceptic: charges against
47


48 REALITY AND TRUTH
his adversary with one vicious thrust: turns and cries, "behold
my triumph ". Only with his "will to believe" in victory, he
has forgotten to note that the sceptic was only "thrown " and
not put "hors de combat ". That last fact matters little to the
dogmatist. He lives his life, believing that he has slain his ad-
versary—a belief which adds a touch of irony to his prophetic
deliverances. In any case, it is deeply interesting to observe
the different effects produced upon different types of mind by
the observation of the same facts. The fact is the discord and
contradiction reigning among philosophers. The sceptic curls
his lip and passes away from this Babel of voices. The dogma-
tist clenches his teeth and resolves to "cry down " the discord.
The Making of the Dogmatist, The Temperamental
Coefficient.
Temperament and natural disposition, as we saw, play a large
part in the making of sceptics, and the same is equally true of
the dogmatists. There are people who are born to grasp cer-
tain " truths," to possess them with certitude, and to assert them
with unfailing vigour. Certitude is the sovereign rule of their
minds, the paramount claim of their nature. Doubt with them,
when it is found, is the affair of a few moments, during which
they prepare restlessly for some assertion or decision. They
allow questions—that is, a limited number of discreet questions
—provided they are not pushed too far into the "arcana" of
things, or of their system. They even allow some inspection
of their arguments, provided the major premises and basic
principles remain untouched. It is, if not ruthless, at least
impolite to deny the major premise. Now as nearly every-
thing of importance is contained in the major premises, the
mainsprings of any argument, the limits of the dogmatist's in-
spection, are almost fretfully narrow. Doubts are jetsam, diffi-
culties flotsam: they would only encumber the safe course of
H.M.S. Certitude. The dogmatist, too, naturally looks askance
at any continued suspense of judgment. He regards it as a
study in pathology, a kind of nervous debility that may lead to


DOGMATISM 49
the insanity of persistent doubt. His examination of "pros"
and " cons "—there is here no lack of the necessary certainty!—
is always weighted by one conviction: problems were made to
be solved, just as life was made for action. This dogmatist
type is frequently found among men of rapid decision and de-
termined will whose bent is wholly practical. It is, however,
by no means rare even among the men who feel the allurements
of speculative philosophy. Wherever it is found, the dogmatist
mind is one that is cast for affirmation and certainty.
The Cry for an Unbroken Uninquisitive Peace.
So far there is a strange parallel between our setting of the
two antagonistic minds, in their vision and mistrust of the
philosophers' contradictions, and in the all-unconscious play
of temperament. But we may go further. The "ethical
factor," which goes to the making of sceptics, is equally
capable, granted a different temperamental coefficient, of
producing a dogmatist—a strange and ironical turn in the
wheel of Fate! The thought of the serenity that springs from
an attitude of impartiality and aloofness has led many a
sceptic to avoid all trouble, and to escape the possibility of
persecution by renouncing all right of assertion. Why should
he "descend" to the arena of polemics, with all its dust,
fatigue, and heat, when he can recline and watch it all as a
critical, calm spectator? In the same way, the dogmatist's
desire for happiness and unbroken peace of mind will lead him,
not to suspend judgment, but to lay down firm and unques-
tionable principles. "To go on questioning every statement
untiringly," he will muse, "leads only to misery. One query
leads to another; one doubt to a second, until the very
foundations of everything seem to rock and sway." Or, to
change the figure, he will say, "We begin in the twilight and
end in obscurity, in the cheerless darkness of an all-enveloping
uncertainty ". It is better, therefore, not to set one's foot in
the way of criticism, which was ever the way of the sceptic.
Why not maintain the little measure of happiness and serenity
4


50 REALITY AND TRUTH
that comes with peaceful conviction, by a judicious dogmat-
ism? Why leave the beaten track of our natural, spontaneous,
and even intuitive convictions, to lose oneself in the forest?
Why give rein to a curiosity which may bury us amidst the
ruins of knowledge? Why forget that this problem of
certainty contains, implicitly, the meaning of Life and Death?
How can a man relinquish his hold upon all things, every
hope, love and fear, for the sake of a few impertinent, whim-
sical questions? Let no enthusiasm lead one out along the
winding-road of question and difficulty. The fate of such an
enthusiast is dark and awful. Weary and famished, at night-
fall, he will hear the blood-curdling "squeaking and gibbering"
of the Universal Doubt. No! it were better to forego the
inquiry, and so preserve our peace. It is the old longing for
the ataraxia of the Sage, which is shared by the scep .ic and
yet sought so differently.
In our effort to understand the dogmatist mind, we have
been forced to emphasize his deep, abiding fear of scepticism.
If there were no such dominating fear, the whole problem of
knowledge would be opened up, hopefully indeed, but with
philosophic impartiality.
The dogmatist shows no such hopefulness, and little of the
impartiality. He fears the consequences of philosophic in-
quisitiveness, and so cuts short the whole questioning process
in life as in the schools he limits his criticism to the minor
premise. He shows his fear, moreover, in the vigour of his
assertions, in the effort of the will to forget the closed door
with all its unpleasant possibilities. In his cupboard there is
ever a skeleton—scepticism. When men affirm things very
vehemently, we may legitimately suspect that they are making
an effort to convince themselves as well as others.
Now this whole temper of mind shows itself very forcibly,
not only in the conclusions, but also in the method of the
dogmatists. They have a way, as we shall see, of formulating
certain consecrated principles, or of standardizing certain
"facts," which they then declare to be indubitable, invincible,


DOGMATISM 51
and axiomatic. Wherever they require a principle, they find
—as though sprung, armed cap-a-pie from the brain of Zeus—a
"primitive" truth; wherever a fact is needed, they find a
"primordial" something. Their defence usually runs along
these lines. Scepticism, by which they mean a theory of uni-
versal doubt, is both inconsistent, and, as we infer from its
vacillation and compromise, impossible. To scepticism, they
continue, there is only one alternative—dogmatism. Short
of blind-folding ourselves wilfully, there is nothing left for us
but to join forces with the dogmatists. Let us, therefore,
acknowledge, with candour, what we really are, and what we
necessarily must be—dogmatists. A glance at the actual
thought of some of these philosophers will render our point
clearer, and a general critique easier. Like the Wise Man of
the ancient world, each of the dogmatists is "above any
possibility of error: the kataleptiki phantasia gives him as
certain a knowledge of his dogmas as he has that two and two
are four: he will never hold an opinion: he knows ".i
The Code of an Unflinching Dogmatist.
One of the most fearless and least compromising of all the
dogmatists was Jaime Balmes (1810-1848), the distinguished
Spaniard who played throughout the eventful years of his life
an important part in Spanish history. In the opening chapters
of his " Filosophia fundamental" he gives us a powerful sketch
of his dogmatism. Early in the second chapter, we note the
delimitation of the whole inquiry, the surprisingly, indeed
disastrously, narrow "terms of reference ". "That bodies exist
is a fact that no man of sane mind can doubt. . . . Explain
it, perhaps, we cannot; but we certainly cannot deny it: we
submit to it as to an inevitable necessity. . . . Philosophy
(thus) should begin by explaining, not by disputing the fact
of certainty. ... A thoroughgoing sceptic would be insane,
and that too with insanity of the highest grade. . . . Whoever
begins by denying or doubting all facts is like the anatomist,
1 Bevan, " Stoics and Sceptics," p. 141.
/


52 REALITY AND TRUTH
who, before dissecting a corpse, burns it and casts its ashes to
the winds. . . . But, some one asks, philosophy begins with
an affirmation, and not with an examination? Yes, this is
true: it is, moreover, a truth whose admission closes the door
on much sophistry, and sheds a brilliant light on the theory of
certitude."1 We might suggest that it sheds a brilliant, even
lurid light on dogmatism, with all its limitations, its self-com-
placency, its tendency to use rhetoric, its fear of scepticism.
. . . "Certainty," we read a little further, "is to us a happy
necessity: nature imposes it, and philosophers do not cast off
nature. . . . There never was, in all the rigour of the word, a
true sceptic." Berkeley, he says, deserved to have said of
him, "insanity is insanity still, no matter how sublime it may
be ". Hume, Fichte, Pyrrho are summarily convicted of in-
consistence, and dismissed in a few lines. "This method of
philosophizing is somewhat dogmatic," Balmes continues; but
"it is not simply a method of philosophy, it is the voluntary
submission of our very nature to an inevitable necessity, the
combination of reason with instinct, a simultaneous attention
to different voices calling from the depths of our soul ".2 One
might think that Balmes was preaching a crusade! He is
certainly preaching a most unqualified form of dogmatism.
Without any trial or inquiry, knowledge and certitude are to
be vindicated. We may just glance at the later sequence of
ideas.
Taking up the problem which Descartes had flung into the
camp of the modern philosophers, he asks if there is any one
primordial truth from which all others may be deduced, any
one great certitude from which all others flow. The passion for
unification, the dream of the deductive philosopher, who
would turn every science into a species of geometry, is seen
to a nicety in the very question. Our knowledge would be
summarized in one great "fons et origo" truth, and the rest
1" Filosophia fundamental," chap. ii. The English is partly bor-
rowed from Henry Brownson's translation. New York, 1856.
'' Op. cit. cap. ii.
;


DOGMATISM S3
would be a matter of" barbara celarent". Balmes, on examin-
ing this question, was forced to admit that one such truth does
indeed exist for God, but that no analogue could be found in
our human knowledge. No one truth can be found to in-
clude all others implicitly. Truths, he suggests, are of two
kinds, "real" and "ideal ". We call facts or whatever exists,
"real" truths: we call the necessary connection of ideas,
ideal truths. Now each of these truths, each type of knowledge,
stands facing the other, locked in its own domain.
All our knowledge of facts, our perception of things, are
simply facts, no more, no less—important, unquestionable,
ultimate. But without some use of principle, or some of the
generalizing play of mind, they must necessarily remain sterile,
an army of data without further significance. They are given
—that is all. No such truth, as a fact, can be expected to serve
as a fountain of certitude or to help us to gauge, for instance,
the truth of the principles by which we think. When, further,
Balmes searches among his "ideal" truths, he is driven to
the same conclusion. The principle of contradiction, for
instance, of which we are so strangely certain, leaves us, on
examination, with the simple affirmation that a thing cannot
both be and not be. It is simple and ultimate, but will never
lead us to conclude the existence of any reality whatsoever.
So, likewise, for the other principles or ideal truths: they lead
us no further than themselves. The rest is obvious. As our
whole fund of information about the totality of things is
made up of knowledge of facts, and knowledge of principles,
and as neither can lead to certitudes of the companion type,
it follows that we cannot possess any one "fons et origo"
truth or any "portmanteau" certitude from which all others
may be unpacked.
The Cartesian question is thus given a very decided and
negative answer. In the next step, the dogmatic philosopher
shows his real instinct. As no one fountain truth could be
found, he concludes, at once, that there must be several.
What could be more simple or obvious to one who sets out
X


54 REALITY AND TRUTH
to place the philosopher's seal and "imprimatur" on the
realism of plain men? Unabashed, Balmes proceeds not in-
deed to question and search, but to lay down laws, discovering
fundamental truths, wherever he felt the need of a bastion in
his fortifications against the sceptics.
There are, he maintains, three distinct ways of acquiring
knowledge or—the phrases are synonymous to the dogmatist
—of perceiving truth. There is first, the immediate grasp of
consciousness, secondly, the method of evidence, and lastly,
what he styled by a barbarous combination of words, an intel-
lectual instinct or intuition. By the immediate grasp of con-
sciousness, we are convinced of the existence and truth of all
those things which are immediately present to our minds. By
the collection and manipulation of facts, or what comes to the
same thing, by the method of evidence, we reason about "ob-
jective" truths, and penetrate, by the use of reason, into the
real world. Lastly, by our intellectual instinct, we are sure of
certain truths which depend neither on the use of evidence
nor on the immediate witness of consciousness. Immediately,
intuitively, for instance, without any play of reason or collection
of evidence, we have an irresistible inclination to recognize
the "objective " value of our ideas or concepts. The inclina-
tion cannot be gainsaid: it is the work in us of our "in-
tellectual instinct". At the basis of all our knowledge of the
first type, there lies the "fundamental truth" that consciousness
is eminently reliable. At the basis of all necessary truths, in
the sphere of our rational operations, there lies the unquestion-
able principle of contradiction. Thirdly, our calm belief in
the value of our concepts, and of their applicability to the
real world, rests securely on an instinctive and presumably
unquestionable law of the human understanding. Our know-
ledge is thus made to rest on the triple, consolidated basis of
those "fundamental" truths, and Balmes proceeds to show
that no part of the triple foundation can be shaken, without
endangering the whole edifice.
In other words, we are given a clear-cut alternative, almost


DOGMATISM 55
at the point of the bayonet. Either accept these "prim-
ordial" truths, or else yield to the doubt and hopeless uncer-
tainty of the sceptics. "I am aware," says Balmes towards
the close of this dogmatist " tour de force," "that some philo-
sophers of our age . . . deem it necessary, when they examine
the fundamental questions of philosophy, to shake the founda-
tions of the world: and yet I have never been able to persuade
myself that it was necessary to destroy in order to examine, or
that in order to be philosophers, we ought to become mad-
men." 1 And the first book—his treatise on certainty—closes
with these strange words: "For my own part I do not seek
to be more than all men; if I cannot be a philosopher without
ceasing to be a man, I renounce philosophy and adhere to
humanity ".
That, to be brief, is our case against the Spanish philosopher.
He has adhered to humanity only too well, humanity, that is,
"taken in the rough," and given us a theory of knowledge that
deserves to rank with the realism of plain men, which it con-
secrates and epitomizes. Besides, one calls to mind involun-
tarily the remark, "Methinks, the lady doth protest too much ".
There is too much protestation, too much vigour, far too much
assertion of the will at all the critical breaking-points of the
system.
The problem of knowledge is thus "solved " and we find
ourselves in presence of the most unflinching dogmatism, both
in method and conclusion. All that is necessary to secure
tranquillity of mind, and to substantiate certitude, is here given
a philosophic setting. But where are the questions, the criti-
cisms, the doubts? Where, in all this, do we find the least
trace of difficulty, or the vision of a problem? We have already
suggested that difficulties abound, and that no simple "off-
hand" solution of epistemology is possible. One has an
uneasy feeling on reading Balmes that, if the difficulties were
ever discovered at all, they were buried quickly out of sight.
As a direct result, he did not even touch one of the real prob-
1 Op. cit. cap. xxxiv.


5 6 REALITY AND TRUTH
lems in this philosophic discipline—a Nemesis which awaits
nearly every dogmatist. The whole scheme reveals a mind
bent on consolidating the convictions of the mass of men, ready
to manufacture both conscious processes—such as an intel-
lectual instinct—and criteria in the service of his cause. That
cause, the vindication of truth and certitude, is truly magnifi-
cent. The system, however, is so strangely unconvincing, that
we instinctively recoil with the words, "non tali auxilio ".
Into this Balmesian code one might fire shot after shot, but
we prefer to consider a more careful and more subtle form of
dogmatism, before passing to criticize the school. As articu-
lated by some of its more brilliant exponents, the dogmatic
system can be rendered undoubtedly attractive.
Dogmatism at its Best. Its Finesse.
The work of Palmieri (1829-1909) in his "Institutiones
Philosophical " 1 on this point is certainly not without sustained
interest . He follows in the tradition of Balmes, whose position
he adopts and adjusts. Certitude, he maintains, is the firm
adherence of the intelligence to a perceived truth, and here in
the opening statement, we see, all too clearly, the dogmatist
assumption. Why need the " statement" to which we adhere
with certitude be true? Can we not be certain of many pro-
positions that are sadly wide of the mark? However, let us
set out Palmieri's doctrine as far as possible in his own words.
He begins with a challenge to the sceptics, holding that the
universal doubt, whether it be about facts or principles or things,
is intrinsically and necessarily inconsistent. He adds that we
need not trouble to demonstrate its absurdity. It stands con-
demned by the immediate findings of the "court of first inquiry ":
moreover, a real sceptic—how gratifying this unhistorical reflec-
tion must be to the dogmatist—never did or could exist, as uni-
versal doubt is a sheer impossibility for the human mind. This
is one short thesis, in some two and a half pages of succinct
1 Vol. i. sec ii. cap. i. "de certitudine ".


DOGMATISM 57
and forcible Latin, the whole philosophy of doubt and un-
certainty is dismissed. Now while we agree with the conclu-
sion, which in some of its less intransigent aspects is identical
with our own findings, we cannot help feeling that scepticism
has been not examined and cross-examined but rather laughed
out of court. If a sceptic permits himself a categorical state-
ment, in the heat of some argument, it is easy though possibly
a little childish to revel in his inconsistency. But supposing
a sceptic says, not "that everything ought to be doubted," but
"perhaps everything ought to be doubted," or "ought not
everything to be doubted?" What then?
Palmieri's answer is amusing. First, this is not, he says, the
opinion of the sceptic, and secondly, he adds, one may always
ask if the statement beginning "perhaps " or the question is
true. If untrue, it is of no consequence: if true, the sceptic is
"nailed " to a positive assertion. Clearly he is writing about
"scepticismus," which, like many another " ismus," never existed
outside the textbooks, and not about scepticism as known in
history. After this conviction and condemnation of universal
doubt, what more natural than that the dogmatist should pro-
ceed to construct? Moreover, the next step which leads so far
is almost as simple as an algebraical inversion of the first. It
is absurd, he says, to postulate that our reason admits nothing
that is not proven. There must, that is to say, be a certain
number of propositions which are both indemonstrable and
certain. If there were not, we could obviously question every-
thing, pushing our inquiry right back to some basic proposition.
The bases in turn would be shaken by question and difficulty,
and we should find ourselves committed to the universal doubt
of the sceptic which the first thesis has proved to be impossible.
Obviously, then, it is impossible to seek proofs for everything,
or, in other words, certain propositions must be evident without
proof. These propositions, three in number, are styled the
"primitive " truths—there is something very characteristic and
very convenient or, as an enemy would say, adroit, in the choice
of these terms "primitive " and "primordial"—and are to be


58 REALITY AND TRUTH
found contained implicitly in every certain judgment that we
make. The reader rubs his eyes? Let him preserve his
wonder. By means of these primitive truths the mind ulti-
mately settles the problems of all other truths. They may
thus be legitimately styled not "fontes" but "fundamenta" of
all certainty.
And the truths themselves? What are these truths or
principles which "sua luce clarescunt, sole meridiano clariora"?
There is the first principle, that of contradiction, that nothing
can both be and not be. Secondly, there is the first fact that
the thinking subject himself exists. Thirdly, there is the first
condition, the truth that the human mind has a natural aptitude
for knowing, for grasping the real nature of things. These three
truths, which form a splendid foundation for a theory of know-
ledge, are here brought to light; as a matter of simple fact
they lie embedded, Palmieri contends, in all our certain judg-
ments; "qui ea negant indigent helleboro ". If we had no
criticism to make, no unwarrantable assumptions to indicate,
we might close this essay, or at best add a few words and draw
a few conclusions in an epilogue.
Palmieri proceeds to show the neatness of this philosophy
of knowledge. The principle of contradiction, which is the
most universal and also the most necessary in its application
to all beings of whatsoever kind, gives us at once a datum
about reality. The existence of the personal, thinking subject
gives us, on the other hand, the first great truth in the subjec-
tive order; for without a thinking mind that order would not
exist. We thus know something about reality, and something
about the minds with which it stands confronted. There re-
mains only one other desideratum, to wit, some bridge between
the world of things, and the world of minds. Incidentally, this
is the weakest part of his general structure. Now, naturally,
a most satisfactory bridge is found in the principle or truth that
the mind is made to know things other than itself, to register
accurate information about the real world. If simplicity and
beauty of structure were the marks of true philosophic theory


DOGMATISM 59
—we should rather suggest, complexity and ruggedness !—then
Palmieri's theory would lie beyond the pale of question or
reproach.
Once again it is clear that such a system is not a product of
heart-searching or of obstinate questioning. Where, we ask
again, are the problems, or where is the vision of the real,
abiding difficulties? It bears all the outward semblance of a
theory, meant not indeed to answer difficulties or to question
doubts but to clear the way for further philosophic construc-
tion. The cry is ever "avanti"! The logical process is admir-
able; only perilously few facts are surveyed before we find
ourselves leaping from syllogism to syllogism along the a priori
way. In consequence, it is difficult to know where to begin
our criticism. To discuss this dogmatic code in terms of its
omissions, which extend to nearly all the problems in this
discipline of knowledge, would perhaps be too relentless. We
shall therefore content ourselves with a frontal attack on its
assertions. Do these assertions, as they are actually made by
the dogmatists, carry conviction and silence doubt? That is
our only problem. The actual conclusions of the dogmatists are
admirable. Does their method, and their presentation of the
case, go to support their valuable conclusions?
Critique of Dogmatism.
The three great primitive truths, it is maintained, are to be
found implicitly in every certain judgment. Thus, if I affirm
that America exists, or that two straight lines cannot enclose
a space, there lie just below the surface of my thought the
assertion of the principle of contradiction, the fact of the ex-
istence of the self, and the certitude that the mind is capable
of grasping the real world. Now what is meant by the phrase
"contained implicitly"—"continetur implicite . . . affirm-
atio . . . "? A judgment is, after all, a psychological act, an
event in consciousness. Its "reference" and "significance"
may easily be "extra-mental," but in any case a judgment is
a conscious event or fact. To find what such events "con-


60 REALITY AND TRUTH
tain," there is for the psychologist and philosopher only
one valid means—introspection. Now introspection, though a
code of laws and conditions of its validity exist, is a personal
matter, and if any dogmatist on introspection finds all these
bed-rock theses concerning the primitive truths, we can only
wonder or—to be more frank—doubt the validity of his intro-
spective analysis.
Moreover, if he really finds so much, we can only marvel
at his restraint in not finding more. Personally, in spite of a
very real and even pertinacious effort, we discover nothing of
the kind either at the focus or margin of consciousness; any
more, for instance, than we find the Euclidean axioms, the
truths of Revelation, the maxims of Ethics, or the physical
laws. What may be going on in the silent, unexplored region
of the sub-conscious, we do not know, but neither, for that
matter, we would gently urge, does any dogmatist. It is quite
true, as we shall see later, that the principle of contradiction is
asserted implicitly in every statement, whether positive or
negative. But this, as we might have anticipated, is an affair
of analysis, and not of introspection; of logic, and not of
psychology. All that we mean is that our judgments would
cease to be significant assertions, unless the principle were
true. So much we shall be forced to allow on examining the
question. But it is a far cry from this to the statement that
the principle is really "contained" in every certain judgment.
However, as we do not wish either to appear or to be un-
sympathetic, we may turn to a criticism which is far more vital.
Who, to get to the point at once, can find the truth of his
own existence contained in any judgment? I am convinced,
let us say, that Edinburgh lies to the North of London. I
make the necessary judgment, and then introspect, to find
what it contains. All that I find is a little group of ideas and
fleeting associations about two towns, a little faint schematic
imagery, and possibly—if we follow the experimentalists—a
certain muscular "feeling " which in some vague way stands for
the direction "North ". There is no "I," no "self," and the


DOGMATISM 61
question of my personal existence cannot be discovered even
far away at the margin of consciousness. Let the reader
experiment for himself.
No! the facts of the case with regard to our judgments are
very different. There are a multitude of processes which
play their part for a while, and then disappear from conscious-
ness. Of some of these we are fully aware, and by turning
our thoughts back upon these ephemeral events, we may
scrutinize them still more closely. The introspective examina-
tion reveals, of course, nothing more or less than the pro-
cesses, just the sensations or feelings that we undergo, or the
judgments that we make. To be quite accurate, a good in-
trospection reveals, as a rule, not what is proceeding at the
moment, but what has just transpired. From what we find
in this way, it may indirectly be possible to deduce the ex-
istence of a "self" or "ego," but it must be patent to all
that no man ever stands face to face with his own self or
"person" in consciousness. Indeed, millions of men in the
East, with some thousands of disciples in the West, have
taught and believed that the very idea of a "self" is a
tyrannical illusion. In any case, we are so constructed that
the vision of one's own self in introspection is not possible.
We can at best contemplate one or more of our typical reac-
tions, what we do, i.e. what we desire, feel, know—but not what
we are.
No doubt many of us are certain of our personal existence;
that is, if not all, at least most of us who live in the West.
But that certitude, which we hope to defend, is due to a
critical examination, an explanation of life, or to some spon-
taneous metaphysic to which we cling tenaciously. It is not
and cannot be an immediate datum, nor can it be "con-
tained" in every certain judgment. Even to say that the
very existence of a judgment demands as an indispensable
condition the thinking self is to make an unwarranted as-
sumption. Whence comes this conviction of the self? Is it
a native prejudice of us Westerns? Is it a mere realist pre-


6a REALITY AND TRUTH
possession? Or is the self a demonstrable entity? Clearly,
the self must be proven and not assumed.
Now, as we have seen, Palmieri, and many of the dogmatists
who believe in these "primitive truths," make a sudden leap
from psychology to ontology or metaphysic. From discoursing
about judgments—psychological events—they suddenly wheel
round with a theory of reality and a whole metaphysical doctrine
of the self. From discoursing, literally, of "such stuff as
dreams are made of"—conscious processes—we are suddenly
brought face to face with a whole army of metaphysical
realities—selves, to wit—armed to the teeth with dogmatist
arguments. They start, in other words, with a psychological
judgment, and then rapidly and furtively construct a whole
metaphysic which they proceed to unpack, like veritable con-
jurors, from the unsuspecting judgment. One can pass from
psychology to metaphysic, it is true, but only after inquiring
into the value and significance, not to say implications of the
psychological processes. The passage, that is to say, is via
the theory of knowledge, which the dogmatists strangely
enough omit! To leap from conscious events, to statements
about reality, from possible "dream " events to actual existent
realities is, of course, to do violence to philosophy.
Moreover, the resultant confusion is disastrous, for if psy-
chology, logic, and metaphysic are not held apart in the theory
of knowledge, we may expect to find not a philosophy, but—
what is all too frequent—a jumble of what is, what ought to
be, and what must be. The dogmatist, then, in constructing
or discovering the primitive truths makes a truly wonderful,
but wholly unwarranted leap not in the dark, but into the light.
As a direct result, his dogmatism hangs luminously in mid-air.
But there is more.
We have shown that the question of the existence of the
self cannot play any part in our ordinary judgments. In any
case our natural bias in favour of a self must be vindicated.
Let us now concede, just for the sake of argument, that we
really do find the assertion of our own existence reiterated


DOGMATISM 63
with strange persistence in every judgment. Or, let us say
that, on analysis, we perceive that our existence is the first
fact. What then? It is there: it is asserted: it is reiterated:
or it is extracted over and over again. By all means; but is it
valid? Is this certitude, which I repeat to myself with such
unfailing regularity, really justifiable? If so, what is the
justification? Where is the proof, or the suggestion of a
criterion? Is it an intuition? If so, what is the criterion of
a true intuition? Or is constant repetition the dogmatist's
criterion?
These questions are surely the capital points for the episte-
mologist—the real object of his inquiry. The dogmatist,
therefore, after unearthing the assertions of his personal exist-
ence, would really be bound to show that it could not ration-
ally be doubted in the light of any facts; that it could not
possibly be erroneous; and lastly, that it was the minimum
necessary assumption to explain the data of consciousness.
The dogmatist, as a matter of fact, makes no such inquiry.
He is in a hurry, and is led away by the vehemence of his own
desire which prompts his thought, to "scamp" the necessary
questions. To assume a satisfactory answer to these highly
important problems is, of course, to beg the question, to omit
the substance of epistemology—in short, to dogmatize. It is
often quite lawful to assume what one cannot prove, provided
one is frank in stating the assumption; but it is never desirable
to take for granted what one attempts to prove.
The last of the three primitive truths, which we can extract
from every judgment, deals with the natural aptitude of the
mind to know and understand the real world. One searches
in vain for any such certitude by any process of introspection,
though doubtless, on analysis, it turns out to be a conviction
shared by all who have not resigned themselves to scepticism.
Obviously, that is to say, if after making a statement of fact
we were challenged, we should affirm the third "primitive"
truth, and thus show that we shared the ordinary convictions
of plain men. •


64 REALITY AND TRUTH
The fact is, of course, that all of us from our childhood
have some kind of working metaphysic and theory of know-
ledge. We share, that is, the traditional and conventional
account that is given of reality and knowledge, though these
points, as such, may never be discussed explicitly. We simply
accept a general theory which is implied in all that is said and
done, and which forms the very framework of our language,
just as we grow to share the prejudices and ideals of our class
and nation.
Now one of the most widespread and possibly the most
defensible of the convictions of this traditional theory of
knowledge, is the belief in the existence of a real world, and
in our ability to comprehend something of its nature. But
that which the mass of men accept unquestionably, the philo-
sopher discusses and seeks, perhaps hopefully, to justify. In
this particular case of the mind's capacity to understand things,
when the philosopher has once abandoned the standpoint of
plain men, he finds himself in presence of a vast and intricate
problem. Is there a real world at all? What can we know
beyond the fact of its existence? How far can we ever dis-
cern its nature? And above all, in what circumstances, by
what proofs, by the use of what criteria, and above all, why?
In other words, some of the most insistent and most evasive
of all our problems in this branch of philosophy, deal precisely
with this third "primitive" truth—the aptitude of the mind
to grasp the real world. The dogmatist "solution " is even
typically "simple ". He merely reasserts the ordinary con-
viction of plain men, adding, by way of justification, that it lies
implicitly in every judgment. Is repetition, or insistence, a
criterion of truth? If not, how does the reiteration of a pro-
position add to its power of compelling assent? Thus the
justification, even if founded on fact, would add literally
nothing to the normal conviction of men. That conviction
must be examined, not asserted: criticized and not swiftly
justified by some psychological legerdemain. As this "primi-
tive" truth stands, it is only a natural conviction stalking as


DOGMATISM 65
philosophy, and the dogmatist, forgetting his high calling,
stoops to make a typical and unwarranted assumption. His
mind, which can only "toy " restlessly with doubts, and which
cleaves to his "certainties" like a needle to a magnet, has led
him, in discussing or rather deciding these problems, to omit
the whole theory of knowledge.
Sufficient, then, has been said to show the temper of the
dogmatist's mind. They are apt, as we have seen, to find
some important "intellectual instinct," some far-reaching,
"primitive" truth, some "primordial" factor condition em-
bedded in every judgment of the human race, wherever the
cause of certitude seems in danger. The "Universal Doubt"
remains for them a spectre, or rather a nightmare. The
Dogmatists are at war with the sceptics, and for the prosecution
of their war they issue summary decrees.
Yet, strangely enough, these dogmatists are uncommonly
like their enemies. Like the sceptics they really refuse to
consider the theory of knowledge in all its deeper and more
important aspects. Like the sceptics, too, they fear in their
hearts that a real scrutiny will only lead to restlessness of
mind, or to the loss of that serenity which they both cherish.
The sceptic fears that he might be led to assert and prove:
the dogmatist that the scrutiny might lead to doubt and denial.
Both relinquish the problem, yielding to their natural temper
of mind and character, and both lay down certain a priori
principles to guide their reflections on human knowledge. No
two tendencies could, in result, be more different, and yet
these strange similarities exist. "Les extremes se touchent,"
at least in epistemology. The dogmatist's cause, the defence
of human certitude, knowledge and truth, is excellent: un-
fortunately, he does not carry conviction even to minds that
support his conclusions. The cause is good; the defence is
bad. That is all; except, perhaps, that few things can do more
harm than a bad defence of a good cause.


CHAPTER IV.
DESCARTES AND THE CRITICAL METHOD.
The two main tendencies of thought in dealing with the pro-
blems of knowledge have been classified roughly under the
rubrics of scepticism and dogmatism. Both, as we have
indicated, contain many a flaw, and not a few arbitrary and
therefore unwarrantable assumptions. Now as no assumptions
can possibly be allowed to pass unchallenged in this ultimate
inquiry, we have been obliged to dismiss both the leading
theories as untenable. There remains, then, only one con-
ceivable alternative, the way of criticism, by which we
scrutinize all the important doubts of the sceptic, and then
move along slowly towards the vindication of human know-
ledge, which is so dear to the dogmatist. Moreover, this
critical method, which involves a real inquiry, made without
prejudice or assumption of any kind, is the ideal method of
the philosopher. Before explaining the method in some detail,
however, we may introduce the reader to the new turn of
thought by considering the methodic doubt of Rene Descartes.
His writing, on this point, is vivid, and of all the modern
philosophers he is surely one of the most competent and most
attractive.
Born at the close of the sixteenth century, when hopes ran
high that all knowledge was to be rebuilt on new foundations,
Descartes set himself not to recast the older systems, but to
originate a philosophy in harmony with the new spirit. The
systems which, with many variants, had contented the most
competent and exacting minds of the middle ages, had now
entered on an advanced stage of decadence. Philosophy had
66


DESCARTES AND THE CRITICAL METHOD 67
lost all its thirteenth century elan, and the older thought,
which was Greek both in origin and in method, was now
sometimes travestied by incapable professors. Descartes,
finding nothing to satisfy his mind, turned from all the
philosophic traditions of the past, as though they had never
existed. There was to be a new Philosophy just as there was
a new Physics and a new Astronomy. Descartes, as may easily
be imagined, made many mistakes, and initiated many a bad
tradition, particularly in Psychology, by misstating the terms of
several important problems. Whatever his success or failure,
however, the effort remains a landmark in the history of philo-
sophy.
In all his work Descartes has the one-sidedness, and at the
same time the precision—not always the ally of accuracy—of
a mathematician. Whatever he is studying, he is always a
geometer, bent on deducing everything step by step from the
smallest number of initial principles. Anything that he could
deduce from one of his leading conceptions—whether it hap-
pened to be a criterion of truth, or the impossibility of a
vacuum—he held with unflinching certainty. The philosophic
world has since had ample opportunity to marvel at his intre-
pidity.
Now it was this very characteristic of fearlessness which
gave his work on the theory of knowledge, his "Discours de
la Methode," an unusual and lasting importance. He was
bent on inspecting the very foundations of things, thus showing
none of the fear of the dogmatists, none of the lassitude of the
sceptics. He had deduced practically the whole of his philo-
sophy of the inorganic world from the rational analysis of
"extension," which he had singled out as the essence of
matter. Similarly, most of his psychology came in a rational,
logical way from the analysis of "thought" or "conscious
process," which he regarded as the essence of spirit. On
turning to the theory of knowledge, with the same mathe-
matical mind, the same deductive rational bias, he seeks one
certitude that shall be the fount of all others, so deep, and so
5*


68 REALITY AND TRUTH
far-reaching that all other certitudes can be drawn therefrom
by the play of reason alone. He wanted, in other words, one
certitude which should be to his theory of knowledge, all that
"extension" had been to his Physics, or "thought" to his
Psychology. The philosopher's dream and passion for unifi-
cation is here, in the mind of a philosopher-mathematician,
raised to the «th power.
Statement of Descartes' Theory.
Deliberately, then, with this one object in view, Descartes
fixed his plan of search. He would split up every complex
question with its constituent parts and then judge the truth of
the whole by the validity of the simpler factors. He would
thus direct his mind to the simplest possible objects of know-
ledge, "pour monter peu a peu comme par degrds jusques a la
connaissance des plus composes ".1 He would take nothing
for granted, but, on the contrary, would doubt every judgment
he had ever made which did not present itself to his mind
with such luminous clearness—"si clairement et si distincte-
ment"—that hesitancy was eliminated and doubt impossible.
In this courageous way, he would start his methodic doubt
with no trace or fear of scepticism, not for the sake of doubt-
ing, but with the hope of finding one ultimate, irrefragable
certitude, fount and source of all others. "Non que j'imitasse
pour cela," he says, "les sceptiques, qui ne doutent que pour
douter et affectent d'Stre toujours irresolus: car au contraire,
tout mon dessein ne tendait qu'a m'assurer et a rejeter la
terre mouvante et le sable pour trouver le roc ou l'argile." 2
We may briefly hint at the successive stages of the methodic
doubt.
As might easily be anticipated, philosophy was the first
branch of knowledge to suffer from this careful scrutiny.
Descartes was seeking some one truth, which should be un-
mistakable and invincible to all, and he was forced to admit,
1 " Discours de la M^thode," 2nde Partie.
8 Op. cit. 3me Partie.


DESCARTES AND THE CRITICAL METHOD 69
r
wisely or unwisely, that every system of philosophy might be
doubted. Any one school might be doubted by another, and
all the warring schools by the critical spectator. Why, there-
fore, trouble to seek a least common factor of certitude in the
midst of clashing differences and contradictions? He decided
to seek no further, and philosophy, for the moment, was com-
mitted to the deep. Thus from the beginning the whole of
psychology, metaphysics, cosmology, and the practical disci-
plines of ethics and Esthetics lay under the shadow of the
methodic doubt.
On turning to the natural and mathematical sciences—it
must be remembered that Descartes was an expert physicist,
and one of the pioneers of modern mathematics—he found
that they were not self-supporting. They must needs look
for the justification of their foundation principles to some sys-
tematic philosophy. As all philosophy could be doubted—
methodically doubted, be it noted !—clearly the superstructure
of the natural sciences could not hope to escape the same
fate. Obviously, Descartes does not mean to suggest for a
passing moment that the sciences are badly or doubtfully built,
but only that it is useless to seek the ultimate certitude, which
shall strike all men as invincible, in any of their facts, laws,
or principles. Adopting this very special point of view,
Descartes, with one stroke of the pen, marks "doubtful" all
the philosophic and natural sciences. We seem well on our
way towards the Void, or "the Night in which all cows look
black," but, as a matter of fact, the Cartesian assertion con-
tains and implies no sweeping condemnation. It only means
that he can seek no aid from any of these disciplines in his
strange quest for a fount-of-certitude.
Having considered and dismissed philosophy and science,
he now turns back—armed with his terrible iconoclastic
weapon—on his own thoughts. He will reject as false all
and everything in which he can discern or imagine the least
doubt. "Imagine the least doubt," we murmur to ourselves,
as we feel that little can survive such an onslaught.


70 REALITY AND TRUTH
In the past many of his convictions had proved to be
groundless, many of his cherished ideas little more than
illusions. In the interests of truth, therefore, every single
judgment ought to be doubted, for the error of one might
be shared by them all. Moreover, he feels constrained to
admit that all sensation may be a perversion, all imagery
fictitious, all concepts false. After mature reflection it
would appear that, with a little good-will, there is nothing in
consciousness that we cannot doubt. The supposed "mean-
ings" of our concepts may be erroneous, our imagery fantastic,
all our judgments and chains of reasoning no more than crooked
inversions. Thus every single conscious event may, by the help
of some strange hypothesis or the use of some powerful doubt,
be discredited. Naturally, there is nothing left, after this total
shipwreck of all philosophy, all science, and all the events that
come and go in the stream of consciousness, but to realize the
full extent of the disaster.
The unflinching Descartes realized it to the full. The
sequence of his thought is as irresistible as that of a mathe-
matician in the middle of some long argument, or, to change
the figure, as irresistible as a mountain stream in spate. He
would, he saw, be obliged to doubt all arguments and all
sequences of propositions, which he had formerly regarded
as valid proofs—exit logic, we murmur. Every simple pro-
position, whether it be that two and two make four, or that
a square has four sides, may fail. All these judgments, he
will doubt, and if there be anything more simple, he adds, it
must share the same fate. There only remained one further
step to be taken. He would reject everything that he believed
as the result of education or environment—how easily and
bravely said !—all received opinions, as well as every tradition
and custom.
Thus throughout the whole vast range of human conscious-
ness, there was no single element or content of whatsoever
kind, whether it claimed our adhesion owing to its intrinsic
reasonableness or owing to the weight of some external author-


DESCARTES AND THE CRITICAL METHOD 71
ity, which could not be dissolved by the "Aqua Regia" of
the methodic doubt. In all those things there was nothing
that could provide one universal, indubitable certitude, "fons
et origo " of valid knowledge. The darkness has fallen gradu-
ally; the last trace of the sun's reflection has disappeared;
moon and stars refuse to grant one streak of feeble grey-white
light: it is night, with its ominous inky darkness at last!
Thus the term of the inquiry was reached, and with the
term, the discovery of one unfailing, invincible certitude—a
ray of light, all unsuspected, in the pervading darkness.
After doubting, or making as if he doubted all, Descartes
finds that, when all has been discredited, and when every vestige
of validity has been whittled away, he has, after all, been doubting
—that something, doubt, thought, judgment or whatever it be
called, had been proceeding in his consciousness. That fact could
not possibly be called into question by him or by any human
being who had undergone the same experience. Whence his
great certitude expressed in the forms, "je pense, done je
suis," or "je pense j'existe"—the famous "cogito, ergo sum ".
Speaking of this "verite," he says, "je jugeais que je pouvais
la recevoir sans scrupule pour le premier principe de la philo-
sophic que je cherchais ".1
From the " premier principe " Descartes rapidly unpacked
his philosophy—so rapidly, indeed, that it is rather difficult to
decide the precise meaning of his "je pense, j'existe ". By
"pensee" he meant, as usual, not thought alone, but any
conscious event, sensation, judgment, feeling or emotion,
which was capable of being registered. By "je " he did not
seem to imply any theory of ego, body, soul or substance.
The "je " is really a necessity of language—though, quickly
enough, in a few hurried lines, the French philosopher de-
duces a whole theory of a soul, and its independence of the
body. By the use of the word "done," in "je pense, done
je suis," he did not mean to suggest that he had formed a
shortened syllogism; for the whole of the logical chains of
1 Op. cit. 4me Partie.


72 REALITY AND TRUTH
reasoning, and the syllogistic procedure, had been abandoned
in the course of his inquiry. The remark, "je pense, done je
suis," is probably nothing more than an immediate inference:
there is thought, there is being.
In any case the real truth conveyed by the formula may be
put very simply. If all else is doubtful, it is at least certain
that conscious states exist. Supposing that I question the
validity of every content of consciousness, I am forced to
acknowledge that consciousness, whether true or false, exists.
Even supposing, as did Descartes, that there is some malignant
spirit, some "malin genie " who takes a fiendish delight—like
Ariel in "The Tempest"—in twisting beyond recognition every
single thought and sensation, making squares look like tri-
angles, and men look like trees: even so, and granted that
everything that transpires in consciousness is nothing but
chaos, I am yet bound to concede that these conscious
states, chaotic and chimerical though they be, exist. Briefly,
Descartes saw that without becoming insane, he could not doubt
that he was doubting. "Je pense: j'existe" was thus the one
basic certitude saved from the wreckage of the universal
doubt. There is nothing that ever did or could enter the
minds of men, no hypothesis, however wild or extraordinary,
which could affect a truth about which agreement must be
both universal and invincible.
So far the Cartesian method is both interesting and inspiring.
It has at least led us to consider the unique character of one
certitude. Possibly we may find later that a similar method,
applied with a little more restraint to definite propositions,
may yield quite a number of certainties, each as free from
legitimate doubt as the existence of our conscious states. For
this reason, apart from its own vividness and intrinsic value,
we have delayed over the Cartesian discovery.
The rest of the French philosopher's theory of knowledge
is speedily sketched, and unfortunately almost as speedily
dismissed. It will be remembered that Descartes had sought
one certitude which should be a fountain-head of true and


DESCARTES AND THE CRITICAL METHOD 73
valid knowledge, and at first sight it must be allowed that "je
pense: j'existe" looks a peculiarly unpromising source. To
meet a very real difficulty Descartes made a wonderful "volte-
face". Instead of trying to deduce anything from his "cogito,
ergo sum "—the task indeed would have been fruitless—he
asks why this one proposition, from which he had rescued
from the debris and ruins of certitude, is so immovable, and
so invincible. What, in other words, is the formal quality
which gives it that particular cogency, rendering it the most
indubitable of all statements? It is obvious at once that the
philosopher has tampered with his own project—he is turning
one aspect of one certitude into a criterion of truth !—and one
begins involuntarily to lose the sustained interest with which
one followed the labyrinthine ways of his doubt.
On examination, he finds that the formal quality which makes
his " je pense: j'existe" so irrefragable, is to be sought in a
certain luminous obviousness, what he called its V clearness and-
distinctness ".) If clearness and distinctness could do so much
for one proposition, why could not their range of power be
extended? Why not erect them jointly into a criterion? The
philosopher felt the strength of this temptation, which appeared
just at the very breaking-point of his philosophy, and the next
step is a lamentable " non sequitur ". After the brilliant opening,
all the inquiry is to end in smother. Let us record Descartes'
"fall" in his own words: "Et ayant remarque qu'il n'y a rien
du tout en ceci, 'je pense donc je suis' qui m'assure que je
dis la verite, sinon que je vois tres clairement que pour penser
il faut St re, je jugeai que je pouvais prendre pour regie ginirale
que les choses que nous concevons fort clairement et fort distincte-
ment sont toutes vraies, mais qu'ily a seulement quelque difficulte
a Men remarquer quelles sont celles que nous concevons distincte-
ment ".1
The one outstanding feature or formal quality of one
cherished certitude is thus by a species of philosophic leger-
demain turned into a criterion of truth. True propositions are
1 Op. cit. 4me Partie.


74 REALITY AND TRUTH
those which are very clear and very distinct, while to ideas,
which enjoy these same qualities, there corresponds an ex-
ternal reality. After a lengthy introduction, the problem of
knowledge is ultimately solved in a few crisp sentences.
Criticism of Descartes' Theory.
It is scarcely necessary to comment on the Cartesian
criterion which gives an air of unreality to all his philosophy.
It seems to betray the mathematician who is bent on solving
some problem, to get at reality by some "lamda" dodge,
rather than the philosopher who is questioning ultimate facts.
True, indeed, most men unconsciously adopt the Cartesian
canon of distinctness. They embrace readily what seems
particularly clear, and refuse a hearing to what seems obscure
and confused. Most of us, for instance, sift the news in
our daily papers according to some such criterion. If a
writer has the power of describing clearly and vividly the
diplomacy of a Balkan State—is such a feat a possibility ?—
so that things which were obscure and meaningless now look
obvious, we find it difficult to withhold our assent: it seems
too clear to be untrue.
In fact, the Cartesian criterion may be said to be one of
the most widely-spread of all the philosophic heresies. So
many of us are convinced of the truth of all that seems con-
spicuously clear to us, of all our national and personal pre-
judices, of our intuitions, and of our strangest prepossessions.
It is luminously clear to one man that the Middle Ages was
a period of unrelieved gloom and stagnation, that light only
dawned at the Renaissance. It is equally clear to another
that the Middle Ages was a period of extraordinary progress,
that the Renaissance showed little but restlessness and effer-
vescence. One is vigorously convinced of the truth and ade-
quacy of the principles of the liberal party. To another it is
luminously clear that these principles pave the way for National
and Imperial disaster. To one it is unfailingly "clear and
distinct"—that terrible Cartesian duet !—that the whole of the


DESCARTES AND THE CRITICAL METHOD 75
national means of exchange and production should be placed
under the control of the State. To another it is obvious to a
degree that this extension of State-control can only lead to
apathy and retrogression. Need we pursue the critique?
No! all our prejudices, all our least defensible assumptions
give rise to a multitude of judgments and notions, which are
all too disastrously clear and distinct) For a similar reason
we are all convinced of the reasonableness of our likes and
dislikes, while to pass from personal to graver, broader issues,
philosophers love their systems, not infrequently on account
of the clearness—to them !—of the general scheme. All is
Energy, all is Force, all is Change, all is God, all is Cosmic
Imagination—these are some of the products of "clear and
distinct" notions. No! clearness and distinctness, though
they have a way of belonging to a certain number of true
statements, are far from being criteria of truth. Indeed, so
far from being criteria, they are often signals of danger to the
wary. If we are wise, we begin to jot down all facts that tell
against any very clear notion; otherwise we may be dazzled by
its clearness and forget the search for truth.
We may delay for a moment to consider one of Descartes'
own applications of his canon, more especially as it has epis-
temological bearings of some importance.
In my mind, he said, I find a clear idea of perfection. Now
unmixed perfection is something which we have never found
on land or sea—something which springs neither from myself
nor from anything else in a world of many blemishes. The
idea exists of something "more perfect," "de plus parfait que
je n'etais ": it is clear and distinct: there must be a corres-
ponding reality, which gives rise to the thought in me. The
Perfect exists, in other words, as an ontological reality, and is
called God. In a few lines Descartes passes by the immediate
application of his criterion to an idea, to the affirmation of
God's existence.
The above argument is, of course, only a Cartesian restate-
ment of the old Anselmian or ontological argument which,


76 REALITY AND TRUTH
though it has captivated not a few distinguished philosophers,
and though it possesses a certain power of haunting the mind,
must reluctantly be judged untenable. We need only analyse
for a passing moment our concept of perfection, and think
about its origin, in order to detect the flaw. Our thought of
perfection—or of perfect being—has within it a certain positive
element, derived from our observation of the positive but
"mixed " perfections which we think we have detected in men
and things. Abstracting what is good, and leaving aside all
that is imperfect, we arrive by a kind of intellectual "Pride's
Purge," at a positive though limited conception of perfect being.
To this concept of ours, thus purified, we may proceed, by a
negative process, to deny all limitation, and consider the good-
ness raised to the fullest and highest degree, to a state of
absolute perfection. '-Thus by a double process of negation
and analogy, of purification and transcendence, which we apply
to the first positive nucleus of ordinary "perfections" marked
by many blemishes, we obtain, at last, a very vague idea of an
ideal perfection, or of a Perfect Being/' That idea, though vague
and incomplete, may be extremely valuable. Only it must be
obvious that a proper analysis of this great thought of Perfec-
tion will, so far from giving us a necessary guarantee of God's
existence, only take us back to the ordinary world of " mixed"
perfections and the mental processes of negation, analogy and
transcendence. In other words, our analysis cannot lead us
straight to God, but only back along the path of mental wind-
ings, to the positive "perfections " which we think we grasp
and isolate from the world around us.
We might indeed delay over this criticism, and expand it
further. What we have said, however, will serve to show that
one typical use of Descartes' criterion led him to offer a proof
of God's existence, which is really worthless. But this, though
interesting, is not the point of importance. The proof once
seen, the French mathematician proceeded to use his discovery
in order to give one final touch to his theory of knowledge.
It rounds it off, unfortunately, at the expense of making it a


DESCARTES AND THE CRITICAL METHOD 77
circle—just one of those vicious circles that, one might think,
an eminent mathematician would avoid.
f He had said almost in so many words that clearness and
distinctness were the criteria of truth, and had felt, perhaps—
who shall say ?—that he had given no sufficient reason for so
broad and comprehensive a statement. To generalize from his
"cogito, ergo sum " might perhaps seem to him, in moments
of heart-searching and doubt, to be arbitrary and quite un-
worthy of the sustained effort of his methodic doubt. Whether
or no, after attempting to establish the existence of God he
reverts to his original theme and asks, with delightful ingenuous-
ness, why clearness should be a criterion of truth. Why indeed?
The answer is now ready. God, the ideal and infinite perfec-~x,
tion, exists, and will not allow us to be deceived where our
certitudes are so natural and spontaneous. Here are the
words: "Ce regie, a savoir, que les choses que nous concevons
tres clairement et tres distinctement sont toutes vraies, n'est
assure qu'a cause que Dieu est ou existe . . . d'ou il suit que
nos idees ou notions, étant des choses reelles et qui viennent
de Dieu, en tout ce en quoi elles sont claires et distinctes, ne
peuvent Stre en cela que vraies ".
There must be some way of discovering truth, and the sug-
gested criterion provides a reliable way. One is left musing,
as one struggles against this neat though circular train of ideas.
jBy the criterion of clearness and distinctness, we are induced to
prove the existence of God. By the existence and nature of
God, we are led to ratify and explain the criterion. We need
add no more. Further comment, indeed, would be a weakness.
The end of the Cartesian inquiry, while outwardly preserv-
ing all the beauty and neatness of a geometrical sequence of
thought, was in reality confusion, but the method may prove
inspiring to others. Descartes was the first of the moderns to
open up in a real and challenging fashion the whole problem of
human certainty. Among the ancient and mediaeval philoso-
phers there was no branch of philosophy known as critics or
epistemology. The question was only treated in their psycho-


78 REALITY AND TRUTH
logy or logic. In this respect the modern world presents a
complete change of view. For the last century and more, there
have appeared relatively few philosophic works that have not
hinged upon these all-important if somewhat obsessing problems.
The difference—the cry for an epistemology—is largely due to
the influence of Descartes and Kant. Of Kant we shall treat
later. For the moment it will suffice to say that Descartes
raised a problem which must be answered, and also suggested
a promising mode of attack in his methodic doubt. The es-
sence of that method, we take it, lies in a state of mind, which,
in its philosophic search queries the certainty of every funda-
mental judgment, until it finally arrives at some certitude in
presence of which further questioning is useless and doubt im-
possible.
Our Own Plan and Critical Method.
We may now pass to sketch our own plan which involves,
at the outset, an application of this Cartesian method. But
before we go further we must "turn out" our minds, and see
exactly of what elements our knowledge purports to be com-
posed. Into what component parts, in other words, can our
knowledge—real or imaginary—be analysed? Let us then
endeavour to make a complete inventory.
As we first glance at the corpus of our knowledge, we feel
inclined to give up the task as hopeless. That knowledge seems
to contain a hundred different features, here and there an
isolated fragment, sometimes a few supposed dates of supposed
events, an almost chaotic multitude of "facts," and then in
addition a profusion of theories, "views," demonstrations, and
beliefs. Yet the whole may undoubtedly be simplified. Our
knowledge purports at least to be made up of simple data—
facts—and judgments or propositions of various kinds. Those
judgments, as we shall see, may be held on no evidence what-
ever—"random judgments"; they may be held as the result
of some long "proof" or some extensive collection of facts,
at the conclusion, that is, of some deductive or inductive


DESCARTES AND THE CRITICAL METHOD 79
process: or they may have some power of appealing to us either
by their own intrinsic reasonableness, or owing to the credibility
of some external authority. In any case, whether they be
immediate or mediate beliefs, or the conclusions of proofs,
they are nevertheless judgments. Here, then, is the first great
simplification of our problem. Our knowledge is, or purports to
be, composed of certain "facts" and a group of judgments or
propositions, to which we perhaps commit ourselves with unequal
degrees of reluctance. Let us say a word about each group in
turn.
The Facts of Our Supposed Knowledge.
I. To begin with there are a certain number of supposed
facts, or in any case data, given to us immediately and directly
by sensation. There are, that is to say, sights, sounds, feelings
of touch, tastes, smells, not to speak of a multitude of " interior"
sensations, respiratory, muscular, or circulatory, such as
the "tingling" of blood through the veins, which—whatever
be their value—unquestionably assert themselves. Though
conceivably they may be of no value, it must yet be conceded
that they are given—data, therefore—and that they are im-
mediate. In addition there are other immediate data in the
form of general ideas or concepts, such as man, being,
humanity, empire, goodness, the r6!e of which in consciousness,
as we shall see later, is more extensive than we sometimes
dream. Naturally, also, we have feelings, let us say, of exalta-
tion, tension, or depression, but these, while being "data" just
as much as our sensations, do not purport to give us know-
ledge: they are not "cognitive" but "affective" processes.
Thus between them, sensations and concepts exhaust the store
of elemental data of which our knowledge is composed.
The Judgments of Our Supposed Knowledge.
II. We need not elaborate the obvious. Naturally we do
not stop short at these isolated facts, events, or phenomena:
we manipulate them in judgments. For the moment let us


80 REALITY AND TRUTH
repeat that we do not and cannot presuppose the validity of
these manipulations. We are only endeavouring to discover
what we actually attempt in consciousness. Thus in our judg-
ments we link together fact and idea or two ideas, which seem
compatible, or else we suggest their necessary severance by some
kind of a negative proposition. Doubtless there are many
forms of actual and hypothetical assertion, just as there are a
multitude of ways of asking questions without ever asserting or
denying anything. But questions like positive or negative
statements imply some linking of fact with idea or of two or
more ideas. Instances abound in all the books on logic which
analyse and classify the typical manipulations of our elemen-
tary data. Again, just as we are not content with amassing
simple data in the form of sensation or concepts, so too we
want more than simple judgments, which give the first obvious
linkage of compatible factors. We are naturally bent upon
making wider syntheses, upon integrating the various parts of
our knowledge so that they may be held together with more
ease and security. But let it be noted at once, that the widest
and most inclusive synthesis, can always be expressed in a
judgment . Judgments, then, are obviously of different "value,"
involving different processes, though the form of expression,
the crisp categorical "x isj1" maybe the same in so many
different cases. In order to simplify again, then, let us divide
all judgments into those which are
(a) Immediate—not depending upon proof.
(6) Mediate—those which are really conclusions of some
argument or which depend upon certain intervening or mediate
considerations.
We may, as it is easier to work backwards, confine our
attention in the first place to the mediate judgments.
What goes, then, to the making of a mediate judgment,
whether it be the statement of a theory or the conclusion of
a proof? Do not, of course, let us presuppose for an instant
that the processes are necessarily valid. We only wish to
discover what the processes and factors are actually supposed


DESCARTES AND THE CRITICAL METHOD 81
to be. They are formed, then, these mediate judgments, either
explicitly or implicitly by the stringing together or manipula-
tion of other propositions. There is some kind of process or
proof, and behind the scaffolding there always lie a large
number of immediate judgments. Thus a mediate judgment,
concerning the atomic structure of matter, may perhaps be
analysed into a group of judgments involving just simple
"facts," an hypothesis, like that of Avagadro, and a chain of
reasoning. In general, these mediate judgments will be found
to rest upon deductive or inductive "proofs," and to involve
simpler immediate judgments, like statements of "fact," and
simpler immediate judgments in the form of principles, like
those of causality, contradiction, and the rest. There may be
postulates at work, as in the typical geometrical demonstrations,
or there may be hypotheses, as in nearly every theory, whether
it deals with atoms, stars, or the evolution of species; but
even postulates and hypotheses are only judgments of a
particular type. Hence it is true to say that all our mediate
judgments ultimately rest upon the immediate, or, at all events,
that the "mediate" judgments rest upon a structure of more
"simple" and more "obvious " elements, which in turn look
to some immediate judgments for their " justification ".
What, then, is to be done in presence of a mediate judgment?
How is it to be handled before we allow it to pass unchal-
lenged?
Many answers suggest themselves, but as they may all be
reduced to aspects of one, we may be brief. We ought, of
course, to be frankly and severely critical, ready to doubt the
validity of the whole mediate process, step by step, until we
are convinced that further doubt is unreasonable or impossible.
Should the supposed "proof " stand the test—it is wonderful
how many of them begin to drift and fleet like rain-clouds
after a storm !—we may regard the final conclusion or state-
ment as something just as certain or uncertain as the immediate
judgments on which it rests. If the whole sequence of facts
and ideas turns out to be faulty or insecure in one of the
6


82 REALITY AND TRUTH
steps, we must either dismiss the whole argument in its
entirety, or reduce it from a "proof" to the less imposing
status of a "suasio " or persuasive argument. In any case it
will be seen that the problem of mediate judgments is bound
up inextricably with the validity and certainty of given im-
mediate judgments. Here, indeed, in the consideration of these
immediate judgments, the whole problem of knowledge is raised
in all its complexity and acuteness.
The steps of our analysis lead us to see that almost every-
thing depends upon these simple, straightforward, immediate
judgments. Knowledge, it will be remembered, is made up of
simple data and judgments. All knowledge, as is obvious, is
conveyed by judgments. The judgments themselves are either
mediate or immediate. If "mediate," they depend for the
whole of their validity on the immediate. We have reached
the crisis then at last.
We turn, therefore, to consider these immediate judgments.
They are statements either of principle—a principle is only a
judgment of a specially important and far-reaching type—or of
supposed fact. An instance of a principle may be found at
once in the statement "a thing cannot both be and not be," or
of a supposed fact in the old "axiom," "things that are equal
to the same thing are equal to one another ". These and a
number of others stand, or appear to stand, without need of
evidence or proof. They can rely on nothing but themselves,
and must by their nature remain for ever indemonstrable.
The word "indemonstrable" is surely enough to set us
musing. "The whole of knowledge," we say to ourselves, "is
then, after all, to rest on a number of indemonstrable state-
ments. The 'mediate' propositions will rest upon those
that are more simple and more obvious, and those in turn
upon the unproven and indemonstrable foundations. Is
the theory of knowledge, after all, to be founded upon assump-
tions, and are we to begin by postulating what we can never
prove?" Let the reader dismiss his fears. We shall make
no assumption of any kind, whatever, and shall ask no indul-


DESCARTES AND THE CRITICAL METHOD 83
gence in the shape of any postulate, however reasonable. Let
us therefore proceed to fulfil our promise.
These immediate judgments carry conviction to our minds.
They induce the calm stite that excludes all but so-called
fictitious doubt, on account of their spontaneous appeal to
our intelligence. Briefly, concerning these immediate pro-
positions we find on introspection not a few certitudes or
states of mind that rest calm and undisturbed in their affirma-
tion. No philosopher, moreover, has ever queried the exist-
ence of these typical states or psychological events. The
sceptics, of course, admit their existence, before passing to
question their validity: they exist, but there is no hope of
justifying them, of finding a criterion. The dogmatists would
rather die than doubt their existence: they are taken at their
face-value, and given a philosophic consecration. Now it is
precisely these certitudes, which, defensible or not, are ad-
mitted by all to exist, that form the real starting-point of our
inquiry. What are we to do in presence of these indemon-
strable, certain judgments?
In order to think concretely—philosophy, after all, is not a
game of " hide and seek " in a vacuum—let us take three de-
finite instances. It so happens that it is easy, and expedient
for our purpose—that of making a thorough inquiry—to single
out the three supposed " first principles " or " laws of thought,"
the principles of identity, contradiction, and excluded middle.
The statements of these principles run as follows: "a thing
is what it is," "a thing cannot both be and not be," "a thing
must either be or not be ". Their appeal is immediate and
urgent: they are indemonstrable. Now, if they really need
proof, then a theory of knowledge is strictly impossible.
Further, if they are not so certain as to exclude and silence
all doubt, if they are not indubitable, that is, though, inde-
monstrable, then equally well our efforts in this discipline will
be doomed to failure. Can they be doubted? Before we
can answer, we must make a real and pertinacious effort to
cast suspicion on these principles. Obviously, it is only fair to


84 REALITY AND TRUTH
endeavour to doubt the truth of these statements, which play
so strange and so incessant a part in the structure of all our
supposed knowledge. We shall, then, in our next chapter
make a careful, detailed effort to doubt these so-called
"principles of being," or "laws of thought ".
Let us, however, realize fully how much hangs in the
balance. If we succeed for one moment in casting a legitimate
doubt on their validity—we are obviously not writing the
libretto of an extravaganza—then the game is "up," and no
philosophy can be of more value that the inconsequent dream
of a sleeper. We are about to apply the Cartesian method
of doubt to these single indemonstrable propositions.
Those who start out on the inquiry for the first time, without
being able to forecast the result, ought, if they realize anything
of its significance, to have something of the delightful and
dangerous feeling of one who walks along the very narrow
ledge of a precipice. Wasn't it Browning who said, "our in-
terest is on the giddy edge of things "? If the ledge gives
way, the climber can only hope to be whirled through space,
into the sunless depths of the precipice. If, on the other
hand, the ledge holds, and the passage is effected, he will have
lived through an experience which the magnitude of the risk
will not allow him to forget. If the epistemologist is bound
to live through some weary moments of despair, when the
stillness and gloom grow almost oppressive, he can at least
appeal to certain incidents on his journey, which are both
in spiring and thrilling.
A word of summary may be acceptable, before we set out
on the Cartesian way of doubt. We have found that all know-
ledge is composed of simple data—sensations and concepts—
and judgments which may be either mediate or immediate.
Our inquiry into the validity of mediate judgments, with all
their ornate trappings of hypotheses, postulates, principles,
reasonings, facts, may be entirely suspended for the moment.
They depend wholly upon the adequacy of the simple data,
and the validity of the immediate judgments. It might seem


DESCARTES AND THE CRITICAL METHOD 85
advisable, therefore, to begin by discussing and criticizing the
data. That course, however, is quite impossible, until we have
established and proven the existence of an external, real
world, to which these data purport, at least, to have reference.
Now, in order to prove the existence of the extra-mental, real
world, we must use certain principles, which, fortunately or
otherwise, are immediate. We are thus forced, by the nature
of our inquiry, to turn aside for the moment from the simple
data, and to address ourselves to the critique and doubt of
certain immediate judgments or principles. To the data we
shall return much later, when they can be adequately "set,"
criticized, and explained. Our task here and now is urgent
and important enough. We have isolated three or four im-
mediate judgments, which we shall now make a real and
vigorous effort to doubt. If the doubt persists, we must face
disaster. That is at least the beginning of the critical method.


CHAPTER V.
RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS.
So far we have discovered that all our knowledge, good or bad,
is bound up with the validity of a given number of immediate
judgments, which while being necessarily indemonstrable are
nevertheless certain. But what is the value of such spon-
taneous certainty? The question is necessary and urgent:
indeed, it carries us right to the very heart of our theme. To
these natural spontaneous certitudes of ours, or rather to three
of the most important of them, we now propose to turn our
thoughts in an effort of doubt. Unchallenged they cannot pass:
they are by their nature indemonstrable, and therefore rest on
no suppositions or proof: there is only one conceivable method
of challenge—the trial by doubt. If the judgments cannot
withstand the ordeal, then the cause of certitude is crippled
and broken, and a theory of knowledge no more at best than
a luminous defence of certain assumptions.
The Three First Principles.
We begin then with the three so-called first principles, which
are discussed as the principles of being in metaphysic, and as
the laws of thought in logic—the principles, that is, of Iden-
tity, Contradiction, and Excluded Middle. And first—with-
out in the least prejudicing the issue, or suggesting anything
that may break the power of our coming doubt—we may say a
word as to the supposed derivation of these principles, and of
their "transcendental " nature. We only state the case, which
must be defended by the metaphysician.
Metaphysic, as is well known, is the ultimate science of
86


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 87
being, with interests as wide-flung ^s the whole universe, em-
bracing all reality of whatsoever kind within its ample range.
After having fixed and discussed the subject-matter of his
science, to wit, being-in-general or being, in so far as it is
applicable to all things that are, without trace of limitation
or particularity, the metaphysician passes to discover what
exactly are the properties common to each and every real
being. He does not deal with individual properties, like
invisible rays, colour, brightness, dimension, weight, which
mark particular "things" or which characterize any special
genus or species. The collection of individual or specific
properties is the work of the natural scientist: the meta-
physician, not unmindful, we trust, of all the scientific dis-
coveries, is on the track of qualities that are not particular,
but universal. These all-embracing universal properties of
his search, seeing that they are applicable to all being with-
out exception, and thus transcend every particular genus or
species, he styles transcendentals—a term which like many
another in philosophy has, in the course of its use, under-
gone a variety of meanings. Here, as used by a careful meta-
physician, a transcendental is only a quality which mounts
above and beyond (" trans-scandere ") all particularity. "Being"
is thus a transcendental term, while "time," or for that matter
"beauty," is not sufficiently free from particularity, to share the
high company of the soaring transcendentals. "Being" is
obviously applicable to all reality, while there is at least one
being, God—we speak, of course, of the God whose existence
is proven by philosophy—of Whom "time " cannot be predi-
cated, Who is eternal. So, too, it will be even more obvious
that many individual "things" are beautiful, while a large
number are repulsive or ugly.
Now the transcendental properties, which belong to "every-
body" and "everything," are found to be three in number.
They are unity, which means nothing more than the absence
of division, "goodness," which only means that things have a
fixed nature, and definite purpose, and "truth," which implies


88 REALITY AND TRUTH
that things, on being related to a mind, can be comprehended.
When to these properties we have added the three terms
"being" (" thing "), "essence" (" nature "), and "something"
—here used in the sense of something distinct from all else
("aliquid—aliud quid")—we have exhausted our stock-in-
trade of transcendentals. There exist no other terms that can
be applied fearlessly throughout the whole vast compass of
reality. So much for the transcendentals.
Now these six terms may be linked together or attributed
to one another, with the result that we find ourselves in pos-
session of a number of judgments of a unique, far-reaching,
indeed all-inclusive type. These judgments which show no
vestige of particularity share in the transcendental nature of
their constitutive terms, and are therefore styled first principles.
Thus link "being" with "nature," and we say at once a being
is its nature, or more easily in English, "a thing is what it is,"
and find ourselves face to face with the first Principle of
Identity. And so for the other Principles of Contradiction and
of Excluded Middle: they are constructed with terms that are
strictly transcendental.
It is not for us, here and now at all events, to discuss and
defend this metaphysical view of things. Suffice it to say that
in the older philosophies—at least the older philosophies at
their best—these principles were formed in this way and at-
tributed fearlessly to all reality.
On turning to discuss Logic these same philosophers found
that we habitually thought of things in terms of these self-same
principles. The principles governing reality, and the laws
governing our thought about reality, thus turned out to be one
and the same. What wonder, then, that the theory of know-
ledge was only a thing of brief indications for those philoso-
phers who were convinced that the mind thinks of things as
they are, or to put it more technically that the laws of thought
and principles of being are identical! But whatever their
genesis or nature, it is undeniable that these principles form,
as it were, the iron-girders of all our thought-structure. In-


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 89
deed, they are so deep-set in the general construction that we
can only marvel at the penetration of those philosophers who
first revealed their true nature. It needed the unclouded
wisdom, the vision of the Greeks. However, these are the
principles. Transcendental or not, the theses must be de-
fended in metaphysic. Let us now make a frank and real effort
to doubt them.
The Principle of Identity on Trial.
The first is the Principle of Identity, that a thing is its own
essence, or as we express it more deftly, "a thing is what it
is ". At first sight it seems obvious almost to the extent of
being a tautology, something so far beyond the range of ordi-
nary doubt as to be exasperating to the destructive critic.
Clearly no ordinary hypothesis will be of the slightest avail in
the assault. Let us therefore take a great leap, and make a
very daring suggestion. Let us suppose that all our knowledge
is spurious; that we have never once thought of "things " as
"they are "; that our fund of imagery and concepts is illusory;
that all our judgments are strangely inconsequent, perverted,
valueless. What then?
The suggestion is extraordinary and radical enough, beyond
question, but does it cast the least doubt on the Principle
of Identity? The answer rings out clearly. Not even for an
instant does it cast the least suspicion on this first principle.
We only conclude that we may never know things as they
really are, or that we are forced to "know " them in some per-
verse and incoherent way, devoid of all relation to fact. Thus
we might never know what things are, but that does not help
us to doubt—even in a passing moment of rational unsteadi-
ness—that they are what they are. Just as you cannot doubt
that you are doubting, while you are doubting; so also you
cannot doubt that if things are, they are what they are. Even
the total ruin of our knowledge of the nature of things
leaves this strange judgment of identity supremely unaffected.
Granted for the moment that things distinctly are not what


9o REALITY AND TRUTH
we think them to be, they are at least what they are. It
begins to look as if there were at least one other judgment, as
invincible and as indubitable, as the existence of our conscious
states.
In order to enforce this truth, let us extend the first sug-
gestion to cover all its implications.
Let us suppose that all our cognitive processes are badly
constructed, so that our minds, completely and utterly distorted
by some inherent vice, are only capable of yielding thoughts
that are chimerical and judgments that are erroneous. Even
by the aid of such an hypothesis, which might justly be styled
extreme and gratuitous, we cannot doubt this Principle of
Identity. If every other judgment is compromised to a hope-
less degree, if every other linkage of fact and idea or of two
ideas is no better than the incoherent murmurings of deluded
people, yet this principle, a strange judgment of a unique kind,
dealing not with our conceptual knowledge but with the onto-
logical reality of things, is saved from the wreckage. These
transcendental principles, it would seem, transcend not only
every genus and species, but also every rational or irrational
human doubt.
So far our suggestions have been broad, involving the ruin
of all knowledge. Now lest perhaps we should seem to be
complicating, and thus evading the direct issue, to wit, the
certainty of one particular judgment of identity, let us make
a particular supposition, aimed straight at the validity of this
one principle.
"Other judgments may be invalid," the inveterate sceptic
may suggest. "Why should not the Principle of Identity
share the same fate? We are often 'possessed ' by supposed
'truths,' readily yielding assent to propositions which turn
out later to be unfounded or even worthless. What guarantee
have we that this almost truculent Principle of Identity will
not suffer the same degradation with the lapse of years or
perhaps even months?" "Besides it is quite easy," he may
say, "to doubt the principle. We have only to suppose that


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 91
we are 'abnormal' on this particular question of identity, in
order to reduce our principle to the ordinary level of errone-
ous, and therefore dubitable judgments." We can almost see
the sceptic reclining with ill-concealed satisfaction, after having
delivered his soul of a doubt in the typical form of a question.
We offer no defence for the moment. We are prepared to go
to any legitimate lengths along the way of rational doubt. Let
us therefore scrutinize the supposition, and turn to doubt the
Principle of Identity, if we can.
The hypothesis may be summarized in two propositions:
"that this particular judgment is invalid," and "that this
judgment is worthless, as it only reflects our pathological
condition of mind on the question of identity". And first,
"that this particular judgment is invalid ".
None can deny that the difficulty is sufficiently particularized
at last. "Invalid" is a word that sets us thinking. It means,
we suppose, that terms have been linked in this proposition,
which ought, strictly speaking, to have been dissociated. Then
it supposes at least that a correct linkage, in which two com-
patible factors were associated, would be valid. Now this
judgment of identity may be expressed in the form "A is A".
Yet "A " and "A " are not compatible ?" A " and "A" ought
to be dissociated, because . . .? But why stumble along?
An invalid proposition is always of the form "A is B," that
America is naturally bellicose, that war is unjust, and never of
the form "A is A," "that America is America," or "that war
is war". No! clearly, if validity means anything, it cannot
be invalid to identify two things, A and A, which are identical!
We were prepared to doubt our principle, but the supposi-
tion turns out to be too extravagant. It will not bear scrutiny
because it is irrational, and, finally, meaningless. So much
for the first half of the sceptic's hypothesis. Now let us turn
to the second part.
It may be that we are "abnormal" on the question of
identity, and that our deliverances on the subject should be
accepted with fitting—shall we say ?—reserve. We shall see.


9a REALITY AND TRUTH
The key to the matter is found in the term "abnormal".
Of course we may go wildly wrong in identifying things that are
different, just as people sometimes exhibit a strange caprice in
tracing facial resemblances. Thus if we ever identify, partly
or wholly, two separate, different things, we may indeed be
the victims of some psychological abnormality. But if we
identify a thing with itself, A with A, what room is there for
any caprice? How, where, and when, can we go wrong? No!
it would appear that "A is A" is so sane and sober a judg-
ment, as to be the norm of validity, to which we return in
moments of difficulty and mental anxiety. If, therefore, the
"norm" be "abnormal," the "normal" itself, how strange
shall it be! In other words, this difficulty cannot be taken
seriously: it renders both the terms, "normal" and "ab-
normal," meaningless—just a meaningless collection of not
very graceful sounds. As the pivoting term "abnormal"
turns out to be meaningless, the difficulty vanishes. But let
the reader test the matter for himself. It is easy to collect
"paper" difficulties, to suggest destructive arguments: the
mind remains firmly, quietly convinced of its guiding principle
of identity from beginning to end.
We conclude, therefore, that the certainty of this principle
is just as irrefragable as the existence of conscious states. No
supposition that I can make, no power that I can invoke, can
possibly detract from either of these propositions, which we
strictly describe as indubitable. The result is so far satisfac-
tory. In addition it begins to look as if fearlessness in criticism
and doubt were going to lead, not to the much over-estimated
suspense of judgment of the sceptics, but rather to a series of
vigorous and uncompromising assertions. This thought may
help us in the critical work that lies before us. The way is
long, and, to tell the truth, we need a little encouragement.
The Principle of Contradiction on Trial.
With a distinct feeling that rational doubt is a hopeful
method which may yet lead us far in our epistemological


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 93
inquiry, we turn to deal with the second of the three first
principles. Called the Principle of Contradiction, it may be
stated thus: "that a thing cannot both be and not be".
Like the companion Principle of Identity, it does not pretend
to solve the problem of reality, the existence of "selves " or
of a real extra-mental world. So far the only existences, of
which we can take cognizance in this essay, are the conscious
states, feelings, thoughts, beliefs, sensations, emotions, and the
rest, the fleeting existence of which, as Descartes found, lies
beyond the pale of human doubt. One of these conscious
states is the judgment of identity, of which not only the exist-
ence but also the validity is, as we have been forced to con-
cede, indubitable: another is the principle of contradiction
which assumes a legislative authority among other judgments.
Its existence, as a conscious event, is beyond question. Let
us now consider its validity.
The statement that "a thing cannot both be and not be,"
while possessing at first sight the fulness of self-evidence, does
not appear quite so obvious as the Principle of Identity. Very
few people ever refer to the proposition, "A is A," either im-
plicitly or explicitly, while most of us find ourselves using the
Principle of Contradiction from time to time in argument.
Sometimes it is discharged as a last shot, often as a philo-
sophic maxim covering no little heat and annoyance. If our
argument is not accepted, we tend to say, "either it is—or it is
not: if it is—then—: if not—obviously!" In some ways, as we
shall see, this principle is the strangest and by far the most
important of all the laws of thought. It is scarcely necessary
to try and find any hypothesis that may s,hake its foundations.
Perhaps it shares the transcendental nature of the identity
judgment—who shall say at this juncture ?—but, in any case,
in presence of the same convulsive doubts, it offers the same
aspect of indefeasibility. Once again we would invite the
reader to attempt a real bombardment.
If, for instance, we make the same suggestion as in the last
case, involving the total bankruptcy of all our ordinary judg-


94 REALITY AND TRUTH
ments, the principle is obviously saved. However crippled my
powers may be, and however crooked my judgments, it remains
indubitable that a thing cannot both be and not be, that it can-
not both be green and not-green, triangular and not-triangular,
virtuous and not-virtuous. It may possibly be true that I can-
not go any further in the analysis, that I may never, by any
chance, know whether a "thing" is green or not-green,
virtuous or not-virtuous. In any case it cannot be both of
the two contradictories. This knowledge may be insignificant
—it is less insignificant than one may suppose, and has conse-
quences of momentous importance—but, insignificant or not,
the statement of the principle remains serenely undisturbed by
even the most radical doubt. The principle is indefectible,
and so far beyond the range of doubt, that it is not given to
the human mind to withhold its assent. It is not necessary
to rehearse the former doubts, both general and particular.
The work has been done once for the companion Principle of
Identity and may thus be standardized.
If doubt, however, is of no avail, let us, just to vary the
motion, attempt a more vigorous procedure. We shall ex-
plicitly deny the principle, and then see what happens. With-
out giving any reason, therefore, we unblushingly state that the
judgment, "a thing cannot both be and not-be," is untrue.
Moreover, the method is refreshing: the statements are crisp
and categorical.
Now, if this denial has any significance at all, if, that is, it is
any more than a curious jumble of incoherent sounds, it states
that the principle is untrue, and secondly implies that it cannot
possibly be true. The denial, in other words, involves the
firm belief that a statement cannot both be, and not be, true.
The belief may be very rational and defensible, but what we
observe at once is that the belief—without which the denial
would be meaningless—is nothing more than a restatement of
the very principle, which is being denied, in one of its mani-
fold applications. "A thing cannot both be and not-be," is
one statement: "a thing cannot both be true and not be


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 95
true," is another particularized form of the same principle.
To deny the first, you need to affirm the second, and so to
reaffirm what you are denying. None could be forced to
come round "full circle" in shorter time or with greater
rapidity. Indeed the very effort to deny the principle has a
bewildering, confusing effect upon our thought: suddenly and
unexpectedly all the engines seem to be working backwards,
and all the ancient landmarks disappear in a blinding fog.
But the facts, it must be admitted, are even passing strange.
If we affirm the Principle of Contradiction, we cling to it. If
we deny it, we affirm it by positive and immediate implication.
Thus, whatever we do, whether we still affirm it or deny it, we
find ourselves asserting it even against our will. It is not un-
fitting in the circumstances that it should be styled a law of
thought. However, law or no law, it is both indubitable and ^N,
undeniable in the literal and exact sense of both much-abused
epithets.
But there is more to be said of this strange principle of
contradiction. All our knowledge, whatever its value may
be, is made up of an endless series of positive and negative
statements. Even in hypothetical and disjunctive proposi-
tions, or for that matter in questions, there is always a nucleus
of something positive or negative. A glance, therefore, at
these typical affirmations and denials may be useful.
In every positive statement we make, whether it be that
"diamonds are translucent," or that "some wild violets have
no scent," we make an assertion, and mean definitely to ex-
clude the truth of contradictory propositions. Thus unless we
meant implicitly to deny the truth of the statement that "all
wild violets are scented," our modest particular proposition
above would be meaningless. So, too, in the same way, on
making negative statements, such as "no metals are com-
pounds," or "some flowers are not beautiful," we mean, how-
ever implicitly, to exclude their contradictories. We may be
thankful that these denials, involved in affirmations and nega-
tions, are implicit; otherwise they would certainly clog our


96 REALITY AND TRUTH
thoughts and impede all swiftness of reasoning. Though im-
plicit, they are none the less real.
Thus in all our so-called definite knowledge, and in each
single, constitutive judgment, whether positive or negative,
universal or particular, we assert implicitly, but untiringly, the
Principle of Contradiction, "that a thing cannot both be and
not be," true and not-true.
Apart altogether, therefore, from certain strange inherent
qualities of its own, this principle is unique in the way in which
it recurs, not as a conscious or sub-conscious process, but in
the logical underground of our thought. It lies somehow
logically embedded in every single judgment, whether of as-
sertion or denial, and may be justly called a ubiquitous ele-
ment of knowledge. If it could once be doubted or denied,
we should be left lisping and gasping, murmuring, not state-
ments of any consequence or any meaning, but incoherent
noises full, no doubt, of "sound and fury ". Fortunately for
us the most pertinacious effort and the utmost good-will can-
not help us to doubt its validity, and even a categorical denial
is of no avail in the assault.
Moreover, this principle is asserted, not only at every turn of
our thought, but also in every single "experience" that we
think we have. We do not wish to introduce "experience"
in any clandestine way, as an ultimate arbiter or judge. So
far from being a judge, "experience " has itself yet to be put
on trial. Imaginary or real, however, this experience of ours
brings in a unanimous verdict in favour of the Principle of
Contradiction. Trees never seem green and not-green; media
never seem both translucent and opaque; sounds never seem
both dulcet and shrill. The principle is indeed analytic, in-
volving nothing more than a vision of the limits of compati-
bility of "thing" and "being"; but were it not analytic, it
might be established as the result of this vast human induc-
tion—provided induction is a valid process!—of almost uni-
versal range. Affirmed in all our significant judgments, it is
reaffirmed with equal insistence in all our sensible experience.


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 97
It is satisfactory to know that it cannot conceivably be doubted
or denied. We have made the attempt to harbour the doubt
and now record our complete failure.
The Principle of Excluded Middle on Trial.
As we have considered the first two principles in some little
detail, we need not delay long over the third, that of Excluded
Middle, which is sometimes expressed in this form: "that a
thing must either be or not be ". The older form of the same
principle ran as follows: "between contradictories there can
be no intermediary "—no "middle," in other words: whence
the title "Principle of Excluded Middle ". For the same
reasons as before, the proposition—once again a "transcend-
ental "—evades the most persistent and far-reaching doubt.
Like the other principles, with which it is intimately asso-
ciated, it deals analytically with what things—if there be
things—are, and not with what we "know" them or think
them to be. It may be that we are condemned to complete
ignorance as to whether things are or are not; that we may
never know which of the contradictories is true. The fact
remains that they must either be or not be, and that one of
the contradictories must be true, the other false. The old re-
volutionary doubts may be applied as before, but the principle
emerges unscathed, indeed untouched. It suffers no exception
and brooks no doubt. Like the companion Principle of Con-
tradiction, it is implied in almost every experience, and all
our judgments. Statements must either be true or not true:
things seem either to be or not to be.
Moreover, if we turn for a moment to the logical rather than
the metaphysical statement of the theory, we see quite clearly
that we cannot even dream for a passing instant of an inter-
mediary between contradictories. We may strive, fbr instance,
by the help of doubt, denial, question or difficulty, to find
some intermediary judgment, some third possibility between
the two propositions, "all lapis-lazuli comes from Russia,"
and "some lapis-lazuli does not come from Russia but from
7


98 REALITY AND TRUTH
Persia ". There is no possible room for compromise nor for
the gracious admission of contradictory propositions. The
effort to find a compromise or an intermediary can only lead
to exasperation, and thence to the explicit assertion of the
principle impugned. That principle is transcendental, in the
sense that it flushes with "being "—whatever there is of it—
and acknowledges no boundary. Like the Principle of Con-
tradiction, it is beyond the range of possible or actual doubt or
indubitable—and beyond the reach of denial or undeniable.
Naturally our treatment might be lengthened, but as it would
necessarily involve many repetitions, we leave the processes of
doubt and denial with confidence to the reader.
Our search, pursued in all fearlessness by the aid of rational
doubt, has proved fruitful. Without going any further, we
have discovered four invincible certitudes, to wit, that con-
scious states exist—our first existential proposition—and that
three of these states, the judgments, that is, or principles of
being, or "laws of thought," are valid and unassailable. Thus
we have found, without making any assumption, however slight,
that we are in presence of conscious states, among which three
judgments that exert a restrictive, directive, and legislative
authority—who was it said that they "policed" the fields
of thought?—are found to justify, beyond cavil, doubt, or
question, their high pretensions. It would seem that we
have at least the beginning of a very precise and lucid answer
to the languid "que sais-je ?" of the sceptics.
Our Own Procedure Criticized.
Our rational doubt, therefore, has triumphed even beyond
expectation, and like all success, it is bound to meet with hos-
tile and unsympathetic criticism. It seems too good to be
true, that we can start an inquiry without prejudicing the issue
by some postulate, axiom, or assumption. Around this ques-
tion, then, criticisms and difficulties converge.
"In your treatment," a critical objector may say, "you rely
throughout on the validity and truth, in fact the general relia-


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 99
bility of the ordinary reasoning process which you have used.
You have not proved the validity of your reasoning. You
have therefore made a typical, wholly unwarranted, though
furtive assumption. The assumption further must be there.
State it openly and every one will see that you are, after all,
only a dogmatist who, like many another, has failed to realize
the extent and number of his assumptions."
We can even hear the sympathetic, indulgent invitation of
the dogmatist himself. "We told you, you know," he may
say with a smile, "we told you that if you were not going to
be a sceptic, you must be a dogmatist. It is only a question
of degree between you and ourselves. Come along. You
made a gallant effort to sever yourself from our company,
but now that we catch you 'flagrante delicto,' making a great
assumption, we claim you as an unwilling, perhaps refractory,
but real uncompromising dogmatist."
If these contentions were true, our scheme would be wrecked,
and we should deserve the label, which we trust may never be
affixed, of " mitigated Dogmatism ". Our reply must be care-
ful, and we may hope convincing.
The indictment may be summarized briefly. In conducting
our search, we have used reason, it is said, without ever being
able to prove its general reliability: whence the assumption
and the dogmatism.
Now "reason" is one of those elastic terms in philosophy
that tend to prevent clear thinking. Never once, for instance,
have we made appeal to any inductive or deductive process
or to any chain of reasoning. Witness the result, four certi-
tudes and four only, which have all been rescued from the
ordeal by doubt. There is no chain of reasoning, no use of
"barbara celarent," no presumption of the uniformity of nature
or of the truth of the canons of induction, in a quiet persist-
ent use of doubt. So far the charge fails.
Moreover we have not presupposed the truth of our judg-
ments, nor that our power of judging is reliable. All that we
have shown as the result of a fairly laborious process is that
7*


ioo REALITY AND TRUTH
four judgments can neither be doubted nor denied. We have
given no certificate of good conduct to the judgment process,
and on arriving at this point in our inquiry, we had not the
least notion as to whether we could ever move a step further.
At this moment, therefore, we have assumed, and do assume
literally nothing, beyond the fact that we do not and cannot
doubt or deny four particular judgments. That is all.
And lastly, we have not presupposed the truth of our
thoughts in making this inquiry. We have indeed collected
our thoughts, showing clearly that we do actually think this
or that, that this or that is the way things seem to happen in
consciousness. But we have carefully refrained from taking
these thoughts too seriously: we have never for a passing
moment assumed their truth. The point of view may be
cleared up by an analogy with certain studies in psychology.
Psychologists are keenly interested in the mental processes of
the insane, and of "border-line" cases. They examine,
collect, and sift multitudes of protocols in order to explore
and chart the operations of these "unhinged " minds. But a
psychologist will not presuppose that the thoughts of the insane
are true: they may be true or untrue: the fact which interests
him is that they are the thoughts of the insane. They may
be strangely pathological. They may be shrewd and piercing.
The psychologist attaches no values, but simply says "here
they are". So in precisely the same way we have turned
out our own thoughts. There they are. Are they valid and
true? Frankly we do not know. Their case will be tried
later. For the moment nothing would induce us to assume
their validity.
Thus, we would maintain, that the charge against us has
entirely failed. "Reason" may mean reasoning in proofs or
arguments; it may mean judging, or again conceiving ideas.
We observe indeed that all these three processes happen in
consciousness. When we reason—however wildly—we cannot
doubt that we reason, any more than when we doubt, we can
doubt that something—a doubt—is transpiring in conscious-


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 101
ness. These events take place. As to their truth or value, we
suspend judgment. The exigencies of language and of the
communication of ideas may sometimes lead us to give an
appearance of assumption to this or that paragraph of our
work. If the reader checks the total number of our findings
at any moment, he will see clearly, however, that the supposed
assumption is a "mere appearance" and not a reality. We
are still severed from the august company of the dogmatists.
The Principle of Causality.
In the light of what we have ascertained, we now proceed
to discuss a principle which is of untold importance in the con-
struction of any philosophy—the Principle of Causality. Philo-
sophy, after all, purports to give an interpretation of phenomena,
facts, and things, in terms of their causes. Without the Principle
of Causality, therefore, the philosopher could not even begin
his search, and without that principle, we could certainly not
move one step further in this essay. The whole of knowledge
is bound up with the truth of the Principle of Causality. Let
us therefore be as exacting as possible in examining its claim
to validity.
We may as well observe at once—need we say, without
prejudicing the issue ?—that we all tacitly accept the causal
principle in our ordinary lives and unsophisticated judgments.
We think we have a multitude of experiences, which could not
be explained without its use. If my brain, from being clear,
suddenly becomes cloudy, and I begin to suffer from headache,
I naturally wonder whether it is due to the heat of the day, to
a coming storm, to nervous excitement, or to dyspepsia. There
has been a change—or I think there has been—and I am con-
vinced, rightly or wrongly, that there must be some reason,
some cause. Or, again, the papers on my table suddenly fly
across the room. Perhaps, without saying a word, or perhaps
with a slight ejaculation, I walk across and close the door or
window. Or I hear a barking, raucous noise during the night,
and determine, it may be, as I turn on my pillow, to shoot the


loa REALITY AND TRUTH
dog next day. All these are instances of sudden changes
which, without philosophizing, I ascribe almost spontaneously
to some agent or cause.
Further, if we wish to see how deep-set is the Principle of
Causality in the structure of our thought, we need only think
how nonplussed we should be if our papers suddenly started
flying across the room, without apparent rhyme or reason. Let
us suppose there was no open door or window, and no injet
for any gust of wind to send the papers spinning through the
air. The experience would be designated "uncanny," and
would be communicated with many a protestation of our wake-
fulness, and our general reliability to certain discreet friends.
The friends would probably smile until they saw that they had
reached the danger-signal for an explosion. They would say,
in soothing tones, that it was probably only a dream; that per-
haps we were unwell, or too highly-strung, or "run-down," or
"wound-up"; that imagination can sometimes be dangerously
active: in short, that it really never happened. A denial after
all is no explanation, and we ourselves, stung by the incredulity
of men, would probably put the case before the Psychic Re-
search Society.
The facts are luminous. Our friends deny the fact, owing to
the absence of any explanatory cause. We cling to the fact
and seek an ultra-mundane cause. We both assert our con-
viction in the Principle of Causality.
Let us suppose for a moment that three nights after this first
"uncanny" experience, the phenomenon was repeated or that
our papers began to flutter at an inexplicable moment. What
then? Well, it all depends upon the person. Some would
regard it as a providential ratification of their former experience,
though the conviction would probably not be communicated
to their incredulous friends. Others—much wiser !—would
become genuinely suspicious of their state, and make im-
mediate inquiries about nerve-specialists and health resorts.
Once again one individual redoubles his belief in some
"spiritual " cause, the other finds the cause of his delusion in


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 103
his state of nervous excitement or exhaustion. In some such
way, by realizing what the absence of the Principle of Causality
or of a suitable application would imply, we may begin to
grasp its extensive rdle in so many of our considered judg-
ments. We may now proceed with our analysis.
The Principle of Causality Attempts to Explain
Change.
From first to last the Principle of Causality is bound up in
our thought with the "fact" of change or becoming. Now
the most insistent fact in all our experience, good or bad, valid
or spurious, is that the world is the theatre of one vast untiring
set of changes, sometimes rhythmic, sometimes sporadic, for
ever fluctuant. We need not yet raise the question as to
whether these impressions are valid and true, as, for the
moment, it makes no difference to our argument. Suffice it
to say that the impression of change is so universal, so vivid,
so constant, that we often wonder—and the wonder only grows
on reflection—where we may look for stability in a world of
these incessant transformations.
Things change in dimension: they shrink and grow. Things
change in quality, in colour, shape, weight, capacity: they
acquire or lose one or more of their properties, like the leaves
in autumn which pass through a variety of shades from a vivid
green to the dull-brown of leaf-mould. Things, too, are never-
endingly undergoing local displacements, as the world in which
we live moves untiringly about its axis, and pursues its secular
path about the sun. Clouds drift across the sky and suddenly
mass themselves together, losing their fleecy white colour for a
deeper and more menacing grey. They dissolve in rain, only
to be caught up again in mists, which once again form them-
selves into clouds. They pass and reappear, growing, dissolv-
ing, reforming. They are a type and a symbol.
The same is true of the world of living things. They begin
to be—one change—grow to maturity and decay—another


104 REALITY AND TRUTH
change—before death—the supreme change—ends their event-
ful history. The seasons pass and recur: the trees and flowers
are seen to grow and die; the tides of the sea ebb and flow
incessantly: "men are born, they suffer and they die ". Rivers
change their courses and their estuaries: glaciers move slowly
down the side of the mountain to swell the rivers. Where in
it all shall we find stability, unless it be the mountains that we
designate by the names of "Ever rest" and the like. Yet the
mountains themselves, what are they? Only the result of some
past upheaval, of some cataclysmic change, wrought ages ago,
in the impenetrable gloom of geological time. We seem to
rock and sway unsteadily as we contemplate this strange age-
long spectacle of restlessness.
As we glance at the world of " things " which we think at
least exists, we are inclined to forget that our own conscious-
ness of itself also bears unmistakable witness to this universal
law of change. Our moods cannot even be charted. They
are less amenable to reason, less interpretable, because more
capricious, than the drifts and tides of the ocean. Moods of
happiness and contentment pass and give place to moments of
sorrow and depression just as moments of concentration and
vivid interest are succeeded by lassitude and listlessness. Now
for a spell our desires are fixed and ambition, it may be, drives
all before it speedily. The months will pass and leave us wonder-
ing how the enthralling desire could even have awakened our
interest. Delights that are real are apt to fade and die, if they
are not actually succeeded by feelings of revulsion. Thus
moods of exaltation and depression, feelings of pleasure and
dissatisfaction, of tension and relaxation, moments of energy
and enervation, experiences of well-directed desire and of
passion come and go. All these events pass and consume their
fleeting existence, to remind us, if need be, that we are the
least stable beings in a world of untiring change.
Here, then, in change, we find the great dominant, reiterated
"fact" of experience. Moreover, it is change which gives to
every science its subject-matter, for every science, whether it


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 105
be chemistry or psychology, attempts to discover and measure
the cycle and rhythm of changing phenomena or events. We
search for the laws and reasons of recurrence, for the reign
of law amidst the bewildering flux of things.
Now the Principle of Causality deals immediately with this
central phenomenon of change. It attempts a solution of the
problem of "becoming" by showing that nothing can be
wholly and fully responsible for its own transformation, that
there must ever be some extrinsic factor in the form of some
agent, force, or stimulus. Let us formulate the principle then,
in the following way, so as to avoid the barren judgments about
cause and effect: a change of any kind whatsoever requires the
operation or co-operation of some extrinsic force, agent, or
stimulus. So much for the statement, but what of the necessary
proof? With nothing fixed but our four certitudes, with no
method but one of doubt and denial, how can we hope to
establish any such proposition? True indeed, a turn of the
head, a backward glance or a step forward, may easily betray us
in ordinary life and show that we accept the principle, without,
however, yielding the vestige of a proof.
Worse than all else it seems easy to doubt its validity.
Speculatively it seems at first sight hard to be convinced of its
truth, and by no means difficult to be suspicious. It looks like
the thin end of some metaphysical wedge. Moreover, this
causal principle cannot possibly pass or, shall we say, withstand
the assault of our doubt as easily as the three former principles,
for it is in no sense transcendental. Change, while being the
law of all things that we immediately experience, is not neces-
sarily the law of all things that are. It may be that there are
disembodied spirits not subject to change, and it is certain, as
is proved in another branch of philosophy, that the First
Cause is immutable. Change, therefore, is not applicable to
all'reality, and so cannot share the company of the transcen-
dental. What, then, we ask, is to be said in defence of a
principle without which we cannot move either backwards or
forwards?


io6 reality;and truth
The Defence of the Principle of Causality.
Now while the Principle of Causality is itself not transcen-
dental, it yet has a curious, deeply interesting one-sided con-
nection with the Principle of Contradiction, and to some extent
shares its universality. That connection is our hope—a veri-
table sheet-anchor. It runs as follows. If we deny the
Principle of Causality, asserting that a thing is wholly self-
changed, we deny at one and the same time the Principle of
Contradiction; though the first cannot in any way be deduced
from the second. We find the Principle of Causality employed
throughout the whole of our experience. We formulate it in re-
lation to change, with which it is always associated. We find
now that if we deny it, we deny the Principle of Contradiction.
Now the Principle of Contradiction—we said that it had mo-
mentous consequences!—has proved itself to be strictly and
absolutely undeniable. Even an explicit denial is founded, as
we saw, upon an implicit affirmation. It is undeniable. Yet
if we deny the causal law, we deny the principle of contradic-
tion. The causal law, therefore, shares to the full the indubi-
table and undeniable nature of the second of the three first
principles. On developing our thought, the point will become
clearer.
A thing or state on changing, however accidentally or parti-
ally, becomes what it was not: it becomes greater or smaller
than it was, or different in some one or other of its properties
or relations. Something that it had not, it now possesses:
something that it was not, it now is. Now let us suppose that
this particular acquisition or loss—the change in question-
was accomplished of itself without the intervention of any ex-
ternal force or stimulus. In other words, suppose that this par-
ticular change contradicts the formal Principle of Causality, and
now let us see what happens. The same thing or state or
whatever is changing can—by the very fact that it gains or
loses some quality—both be and not be something, for before
the change the quality was absent and now it is present. It
has made itself what it was not, or has, equally of itself, ceased


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 107
to be what it was. In other words, it can both be and not be,
"sponte sua"—or, what comes to the same, it can contradict
the Principle of Contradiction "that a thing cannot both be and
not be ".
The denial of the causal principle would thus lead by the
flight of a few steps to the overthrow of the Principle of Con-
tradiction, which cannot and therefore must not be denied.
The flight of those few steps leads therefore to disaster and
must be avoided. In a word, we cannot legitimately deny our
principle of causality, which deals with the "fact" of change.
Like the Principle of Contradiction it is as free from all doubt
as the existence of conscious states. Moreover, as that
Principle of Contradiction is applicable to all being, to every-
thing that is or was or may ever be, it follows that the causal
law shares to a very large extent in its universality. Where
there is change in any one of its typical forms, which are legion,
there we may apply the Principle of Causality with fearlessness
and perfect security.
Objections Against the Principle of Causality.
As causality is a matter of such vast importance—the thin
end not only of a metaphysical wedge but of all philosophy—
we may be readily pardoned for delaying over it a little longer,
and for answering one or two obvious objections.
Let us revert to the "fact" of change again, which is, after
all, what we seek to explain. Now before anything can change
in a particular way, the metaphysician indicates that it must
have the requisite intrinsic adaptation for that special develop-
ment or what was known to the older philosophers as a poten-
tiality. In passing we quote the metaphysician, as the difficulties
with which we are to deal are strictly metaphysical. Let none
hoist us on our own petard. We have really vindicated the
Principle of Causality already, and only turn now to show the
solidarity of our thesis with other branches of philosophy.
Then a thing, before undergoing a definite change, must have
a definite adaptability. Let us take instances from our ordin-


108 REALITY AND TRUTH
ary experience. Gold is malleable and wood is not. The
gold may be hammered out until it is no thicker than a leaf,
while if we apply a similar force to a piece of wood, we obtain
nothing but a mass of splinters. Let us admit, for the sake of
argument, that the applied force was in each case the same.
The difference in result cannot therefore possibly spring from
the force. The two things, gold and wood, must differ in-
trinsically. The gold has a capacity or potentiality which the
wood lacks. The force is applied and that capacity is reduced
to actuality in the phenomenon of change.
We may take another instance. Let us admit, if only for a
moment, that the great distinguishing feature between men and
other animals is that men are endowed with intellectual powers
of conceiving, judging, reasoning, which other animals do not
enjoy. When a man sleeps, we think at least that these opera-
tions are, as a rule, completely suspended. What then is the
distinguishing psychological feature between a sleeping man and
a sleeping dog? That there is some difference nearly all would
agree, but, as a matter of simple fact, that difference can only be
found in the latent intellectual capacity of the man, which the
dog lacks. The man is not thinking while he sleeps, but he
has a real, though latent and unactualized, capacity for think-
ing which separates him sharply from the kingdom of lower
animals.
Now in the phenomenon of change, by which we are
throughout our lives literally besieged, these capacities are
reduced to activity or actuality. Where the capacities do not
exist nothing can possibly bring about the associated type of
change. A university education, useful in training the mind
of a man, would be utterly thrown away even on the most
"intelligent " of—let us say—Mulvany's elephants. We can-
not, even by applying all the physical energies at our disposal,
make anything change in a way that lies outside the range of
its natural capacities. Briefly, change involves an intrinsic
adaptability—is, in fact, nothing more than the passage of that
adaptability from latency to reality.


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 109
From our analysis, it is obvious that a capacity is something
essentially latent. // cannot, therefore, by any chance, force
itself into actuality. It must remain what it was, something
potential and undeveloped, until an extrinsic stimulus or agent
co-operates and renders it actual in the phenomenon of change.
Wherever we look throughout the range of our experience—
to which, of course, we only tolerate an appeal as to an in-
teresting possibility—whether it be to the flight of an arrow,
the growth of a daffodil, the development of an idea, or the
awakening of desire, we find that the same rigid analysis
may be applied with equal justice and apparent truth. The
whole is summarized in the governing Principle of Causality
—that every change of whatsoever kind requires the co-
operation of some force, agent, or stimulus. Change, in fact,
is the meeting-point of an intrinsic adaptability and of an
extrinsic stimulus.
We may now see, in the light of this further analysis, what
the denial of the Principle of Causality implies. If no outside
stimulus is required for a definite change—that is the denial
of causality—then a thing can be both undeveloped and de-
veloped, latent and not-latent, not-actual (potential) and
actual, of its own accord. Once again we find ourselves con-
tradicting the Principle of Contradiction, and thus flying in
the face of what has been shown to be an indubitable and
undeniable certitude.
"But," it may be urged, "the difficulty, if it be a real diffi-
culty at all, must assert itself against your own theory. Things
that are primarily in a state of potentiality pass into the ulti-
mate state of actuality, as you aver, under the influence of
some agent or stimulus. They become what they were not.
Now a thing cannot both be and not be. Does not your
interpretation of change, even after you have invoked the aid
of some extrinsic factor, run counter to the Principle of Contra-
diction? Your reading of the principle, 'a thing cannot both
be and not be,' would seem to reduce everything to a purely
static condition and render change impossible."


110 REALITY AND TRUTH
Our answer may be brief. If a thing became what it was
not, without rhyme or reason, so that a given property could
both be and not be, the principle—and incidentally all clear
thought—would be violated. But if things become what they
are naturally adapted to become, under the influence of some
force or stimulus which is capable of transforming adapta-
bilities into adaptations, then obviously the principle suffers
no detriment. All that we can say in this connection, accord-
ing to the Principle of Contradiction, is that a thing or state
cannot both be potential and non-potential, actual and not-
actual—statements which our interpretation endorses, asserts,
and even enforces.
Causality and the Factor of Time.
"In any case," the critic may proceed, "you have through-
out the whole discussion ignored the factor of time. The
Principle of Contradiction ought to be stated in the form ' that
a thing cannot both be and not be at one and the same time '.
This is the simple truth, which ruins your whole nexus between
this principle and the causal law. Now at last, in presence of
a clear statement, we can deny the causal principle freely
and frankly without colliding with the undeniable Principle
of Contradiction. If we deny the law of causality, we state
that a thing which was x can become x' (change, that is) at a
subsequent moment, without the intervention of any extrinsic
factor. Of course we do not dream for an instant that a
'thing' can be x and x\ be and not be, that is, at one and
the same time. Only if we indulged in this foolishness that
at any one moment a thing could both be and not be some-
thing, should we fail to acknowledge the Principle of Contra-
diction. Your whole case depends for its supposed validity on
a misstatement of your own treasured principle. Your defence
of the causal'law' is therefore worthless."
We have stated this difficulty in a challenging fashion, be-
cause we are fully aware of its importance in the minds of many
serious critics. If "time" must be introduced into the state-


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS in
ment of the Principle of Contradiction, we concede at once that
our case has failed, that our effort in epistemology is
. . . only another dream,
Like the rest we have dreamed so long.
Our answer, however, need lack no quality of definiteness.
The Principle of Contradiction, we submit, has nothing whatever
to do with "time," or with any expression "at one and the
same time ". In the opening pages of this chapter, we showed
that the first principles, of which "contradiction" is one, were
made up of transcendental terms, "thing," "being," "not-
being," and that "time" could lay no claim to admittance into
the company of the exclusive six transcendentals. That alone
would be enough to shake the critic's honest belief in his own
objection; but there is more. Again and again we find in our
experience that "a thing can both be and not be at one and
the same time," or in other words that the proposed statement
is falsified and therefore subject to a multitude of clinging
doubts and difficulties. We can obviously look at the same
thing from two separate and distinct standpoints. Brandy, for
instance, may at one and the same time be food for an invalid,
and poison for a dypsomaniac. Carbonic acid gas is—so bio-
logists believe—food for green cells, and poison for the non-
green variety at one and the same time. A war may be good
for a neutral power, and bad for Serbia or Roumania—good and
bad—at one and the same time. A revolution may be desir-
able for the people, and very undesirable for a dynasty, always,
be it noted, at one and the same time. Obviously then this
statement of the Principle of Contradiction, involving the
expression at one and the same time, is false. None could
hold that such a proposition was either indubitable or un-
deniable. The factor of "time" must be eliminated.
Yet those who introduce "time" in this strange way, really
mean to insist upon a great truth. It is only their formula,
and their unflinching conclusions therefrom that are faulty and
inaccurate. Some phrase is clearly understood in the curt
statement "a thing cannot both be and not be". What is it?


ii2 REALITY AND TRUTH
We suggest that when we say "a thing," we mean "a thing
viewed formally as the same ". We do not and cannot in the
face of our experience—however riddled with inconsistency it
may be—hold that a thing viewed from two different standpoints
cannot both be and not be, or that a thing, taken at subsequent
moments, cannot present contradictory features. All that we
assert is confined to the simple statement that a thing or state
or being (viewed in the same formal way) cannot both be and
not be. Time is thus eliminated—its inclusion leads only to
disaster and untruth—and our critic's objection fail utterly to
overthrow the Principle of Causality.
To take a particular instance, the Principle of Contradiction
shows that a given reality—viewed in the same formal manner
—must either be in a state of potentiality or not, or in other
words that the state of potentiality, while it remains such,
excludes the state of actuality. Obviously, then, it is un-
thinkable that one state which excludes another should, of
itself, become that other—" nihil dat quod non habet"—with-
out the play and co-operation of something other than itself.
That is all that we affirm, now more resolutely than ever, in
the Principle of Causality.
Denial of any Assumption.
Before closing this chapter, we must meet an objection of
a technical and very different kind. It may be thought that,
throughout our analyses, we have tacitly assumed the existence
of a real world, in all its complexity, richness, and changeful-
ness; and further, that all our reflections as to the Principle of
Causality would fail to carry conviction were they not based
upon the changes of this supposed real world. Such a pro-
cedure would indeed be vicious, as it would at a critical
moment presuppose a positive and certain solution of one of
the most urgent and intricate of problems. Fortunately we
have no wish to indulge in any such presupposition. We have
quoted instances of supposed changes in terms of our ordinary
impressions and our normal "experience," in order that a


RATIONAL DOUBT AND ITS RESULTS 113
difficult and delicate, not to say highly technical series of
considerations might ran more smoothly. The Principle of
Causality, however, is a certitude which the mind possesses in-
evitably and indefectibly, in face of any change. Without
glancing at the supposed world of things, we are confronted
with the indisputable flux of our own conscious states. These
events, sensations, desires, thoughts, delights, feelings, emotions,
exist for a moment as they fleet restlessly through conscious-
ness—change enough for a world of reflection.
Indeed we need not even experience the fact of change in
order to set up the Principle of Causality. We should be driven
to the same law if we only considered the possibility of some
form of becoming, of some acquisition or loss of existence, or
of property, viewed in all their generality. In any case, whether
we turn to contemplate possibilities, or the untiringly changeful
constellations of the events in consciousness, we see and cannot
avoid the conviction that the Principle of Causality is as irrefra-
gable, and as indefeasible as the Principle of Contradiction.
The search-principle of philosophy is thus completely vindicated
and established. Liberated from every doubt, unmolested by
even the most far-reaching denial, unmindful alike of the "hopes
that carol," and the "fears that hiss," we may press forward
towards the capture of many a new position, the existence of a
real world, the validity of knowledge, the meaning and vindica-
tion of truth. We have made a useful beginning: that is all.
The Sceptic's Parthian Shot.
We are now in possession of five certitudes, the existence
of conscious states, the three first principles, and the law of
causality. Concerning the rest of our natural "convictions,"
we suspend judgment. Yet as a Parthian shot, there is one
difficulty that the inveterate sceptic, who dislikes any trace of
uncompromising assertion, may fling at us. "It is true," he
may say, "that we have five strangely clinging, persistent
certitudes, but what is the guarantee of their truth? We can
easily be certain of what is false. What can help us to assure
8


ii4 REALITY AND TRUTH
ourselves that these particular convictions are unquestionably
valid?"
Fortunately for us we have already answered the objection
of our very method. Certitudes which we possess in all calm-
ness and security may indeed be devoid of all foundation.
This we have admitted, and even asserted with some vigour.
Knowledge is beset by error. But we have already shown,
in treating these particular principles, that no hypothesis, were
it even the total inability of our minds to grasp the nature
of things, or a sweeping condemnation of all knowledge, can
cast the least partial or momentary doubt on our five certi-
tudes. We made a real attempt to throw them all overboard,
and found them immovable. We assaulted them with every
manner of relevant doubt, and found them supremely un-
affected. We submit, then, with no little confidence, that no
one has the least right to doubt their truth.
Whatever truth may mean—presumably it is some quality
of reliable propositions—these five statements are true. Any
doubt that may be entertained in their regard must be nothing
short of a capricious illusion, the cry of one who would com-
plain of the darkness of night and the brightness of noonday.
Such caprices, in all their windings and consequences, may
be studied profitably by the psychologist who studies "border-
line" and pathological cases. Fortunately it does not fall
to our lot, in epistemology, to take them seriously. If any
sceptic, then, feels induced to taunt us now that we have
found a certain number of indubitable propositions, let him
remember our method—that of rational doubt and denial.


CHAPTER VI.
THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD.
Now that we have a starting-point in our immovable certi-
tudes, we may proceed to discuss one of the most interesting
problems that have ever been raised. Is there a real world of
persons and things outside us, and can its existence be proven?
Granted, that is, that we are certain of a given number of
principles concerning being and becoming, we now inquire as
to whether there is indeed a world of extra-mental realities to
which our principles can be applied. Upon our answer de-
pends the whole of philosophy, the whole scheme of our
"values" in life, and the whole fabric of knowledge. All
seems stilled for a moment within us, as we realize the
momentous importance, the unlimited consequences of this
strangely enthralling question. If we can prove a real world,
all is well. If not, we must assume its existence, and base the
whole of our knowledge upon an assumption. In that case we
begin and end in darkness. Literally everything hangs in the
balance.
The Problem.
We may as well clear the air at once and suggest that the
problem has often been seriously misstated. Men have
asked, "do minds alone exist?" or "must we also concede
the existence of something other than mind, of something
ultimate and indefinable styled matter?" According to the
answers given, philosophers have been called idealists or
realists, terms which, on account of their distressing variety of
meanings, have long since ceased to have any but the vaguest
significance.
115 8 •


n6 REALITY AND TRUTH
Now we submit that it is a point of singular and even para-
mount importance to grasp that the problem at this stage
does not resolve itself into the alternatives "minds alone"
or "minds and matter". That is really the question of the
nature of reality which is treated in metaphysic. What we ask
is, can we show that there is anything at all, mind or matter,
outside the range of my conscious states. All that we know
at the moment, and consequently all we have a right to assume,
is that our conscious states exist and that certain principles,
four in number, are irrefragable. We cannot therefore speak of
other minds—suggesting as we should say in ordinary language
the existence of other persons—any more than we can legiti-
mately assume the existence of things. We have no right, in
other words, to put the term "mind" in the plural. There is
a flux of conscious states, and1 there are certain principles, which
"I" can apply fearlessly to those conscious existences: that
is all.
Thus the problem at this stage is perfectly simple in its
terms. Do these conscious states of which "I" am aware,
exhaust the whole content of being, or are there also extra-
mental persons and things? Is there a reality, whether it be
one or many, which is not existentially identical with my con-
scious states, and which, though it may be apprehended by the
phenomena of consciousness, is yet independent of my con-
sciousness for its existence? The alternative is clear-cut: a
choice must be made. To remain indifferent is impossible,
for in this problem we touch the ultimate foundations of all
things.
Solipsism—the Doctrine that there is no External
Reality.
Let us examine the first alternative, that only "my" con-
scious states here and now exist . It is a theory which, so far
as we are aware, has never been taught by any accredited
school of philosophy, though it has received the name of
"solipsism". It represents a pit into which the unwary may


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 117
fall, or whither the undeveloped tendencies of their thought
may lead. In fact the suggestion of "solipsist tendencies"
has in it something of opprobrium if not of abuse.
What, we may ask, would such a theory involve? For the
solipsist there would, strictly speaking, be no individual person,
no self or ego, no human mind other than his own, no world
of material things, no spirit, no God. All reality, indeed the
whole universe, would be comprised by the changeful pheno-
mena of his own consciousness which emerge he knows not
whence, and pass, he knows not whither, creating themselves
apparently out of nothing as they pass and consume their
momentary existence.
When the solipsist would look, for instance, at what we
should call a "group of men," there would spring out of no-
thing into his conscious present, a group of sensations and
ideas dealing with "men" who never did and never could
exist. The solipsist passes. The supposed group of sensations
and ideas cease to exist, and what we should have styled a
"group of men" passes with them into the void whence they
sprang. Or to take another case, the solipsist looks at a bed,
and sees what we should call the framework, pillows, counter-
pane, eiderdown—so many ephemeral sensations which have
somehow shot out of the darkness into his consciousness. He
sees no mattress beneath, and in consequence that mattress,
for him, has not even the scant reality attaching to an element
of the sensorial flux, as it hurries out beyond the margin of
consciousness. Little wonder that men have recoiled from
any such theory, and that none has been found to defend it—
in spite of much "bizarrerie"—throughout the long centuries
of philosophy's history. In other words, we have struck what
the plain man would call a "real deep-seated conviction of
the whole human race," that the conscious states of the indi-
vidual thinker do not exhaust reality.
Yet it must be observed, however unpalatable the truth may
be, that no immediate internal critique can ever ruin the
position of the solipsist. Thus if a friend for the sake of


n8 REALITY AND TRUTH
argument adopted this theory, with all its limitations and un-
flinching consequences, we should find—at least if we relied
upon internal discord—his fortress impregnable. He could
indeed explain nothing, but no internal contradiction can be
discovered in a theory at once so extravagant and so narrow.
We shall show later that the Principle of Causality, which we
have found to be undeniable, is the only engine that can reduce
the solipsist position to ruins. For the moment, we rather
insist that no intrinsic discrepancy can be shown to exist in
this strange, fantastic theory. This, however, need not surprise
us. It might be impossible to convince a madman that he
was not the Napoleon or the Peter the Great of his dreams.
Every argument would be "turned" or perhaps greeted with a
smile of endurance: every expressed thought would serve only
to reinforce the dominant obsession.
The Alternative—Some Form of Realism.
The alternative that the conscious states of which I am
aware do not constitute the whole universe, that there exists
some "other," is a "very widespread conviction ". Naturally
we do not dream of invoking the "general consent of mankind"
in order to prove that mankind exists. Let us see, then, what
seems to happen in the way of " grasping " the real world. What
is it that gives us this steady, almost unyielding conviction in
the existence of some "other"?
From our earliest years we have all been convinced without
reasoning or argument by a kind of immediate, processless
intuition, that there are persons and things outside us. To
question "the fact" is, for many, impossible. It is difficult
for all, as the problem only emerges slowly after much reflec-
tion and scrutiny. The record of our experience, in other
words, shows that we have what purports to be an immediate
unargumentative, unproven "intuition" of the existence of
something "other " than our conscious states. Can we justify
this intuition—there lies the "anguishing" problem—and
prove it to be valid?


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 119
We may observe at once that this theory of "immediate
intuition," like solipsism, cannot possibly be disproved by any
internal critique. It has a wide interpreting power, as we may
gather in a moment's reflection, and seems to draw together a
hundred otherwise inexplicable elements of the stream of con-
sciousness. Indeed we hope to submit a permanent valid
proof of the theory in this chapter. For the present, however,
as we scrutinize the terms of the problem, it is well to note the
impossibility of finding any inherent contradiction in this
theory, which, while being fraught with not a few technical
and detailed difficulties, leads us out of consciousness into a
very different and grander world. If anyone, then, feels a
spontaneous attraction for theories, which are free from all
internal contradiction—theories que je comprends "si claire-
ment et si distinctement" hein ?—let him realize at once that
"intuitionism " of some kind will answer his purpose just as
well as the extravagant fancy of the solipsist.
.Without going any further, therefore, we may suggest the
following summary. Both "intuitionism" and "solipsism"
make an equal a priori claim as each is equally free from
internal discrepancy. In addition one has the power of in-
terpreting nearly all our "experience," in a way that brings
conviction and certitude to our minds, whereas the other—
the philosophy of an oyster in a closed shell—so far from
explaining anything, reduces every thought and sensation to
meaningless "creative" confusion. The presumption is
strongly in favour of the theory expressive of men's deepest
conviction: but presumption is not proof.
Fortunately, however, there is more to be said in favour of
"intuitionism ". The Principles of Contradiction and Excluded
Middle are undeniable, as we have already shown. Thus we
may state at once, without fear of difficulty, doubt, or question,
that either "my" conscious states exhaust the whole of reality
—whatever " reality " may mean !—or they do not. In the first
case, we are committed to solipsism; in the second, we deny
that theory. We shall first show that solipsism offends against


i2o REALITY AND TRUTH
the Principle of Causality, which we, using the trial by doubt
and denial, have already established and defended. If solipsism
fails we are left with only one alternative, that there must be
something "other" than conscious states, though it is by no
means easy to gather what that "other" necessarily is. We
need not, however, anticipate: the work in hand—the destruc-
tion of solipsism by an appeal to causality—is quite sufficient
to occupy all our attention.
The Defence of Critical Realism.
We begin, then, unhesitatingly with the Principle of Causality.
No changing thing or state can be wholly responsible for its
own transformations: it needs the operation or co-operation of
some agent, force, or stimulus. Now conscious states, the
immediate psychological data of introspection, are eminently
changeful. For ever coming, for ever going, never-endingly
fleeting, they pass and reappear, or group themselves differently
like clouds that are driven athwart the sky by a March wind.
What can be more obvious, more indubitable? scarcely any
two introspections will reveal the same mental content. The
imagery will be different: the colours will have faded and
given way to greys: the brightness will have disappeared:
the sounds will have died away or changed in timbre, pitch, or
volume: the accompanying feelings will have passed through
one of their curious " crescendo " or " diminuendo " movements,
which lay them open to the constant charge of fickleness and
unreason: briefly the whole mental "constellation " will have
changed in its elements and relations.
Indeed these whirling changes, that remind us of the rest-
lessness and swirl of the waves, are almost beyond the pos-
sibility of measurement. Only by long experiment of the
closest and most accurate description—as those who have
worked in our psychological laboratories know so well!—can
we find even the hint of a rhythmic recurrence that may
ultimately be formulated as a law. Conscious states change:
indeed they never rest. To them in consequence the Prin-


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 121
ciple of Causality can and must be applied. No changing
state, not one of these phenomena which occupy our con-
sciousness for a moment only to disappear again, can possibly
be to itself the full reason of its own transformation. We
therefore reach our first important conclusion in this study.
Some force or agent or stimulus, something "other" than the
changing phenomenon itself, is required to explain each and every
one of the facts of sensation, thought, feeling, and the other psy-
chological events. We have simply taken an indubitable fact,
the existence of the phantasmagoria of conscious events, to
which we have applied one undeniable principle, that of cau-
sality. The result clearly is beyond the range even of a
sceptic's doubt.
What, then, is the stimulus which elicits these transitory
phenomena? To suggest the external world by way of answer
would, at this stage of course, be unphilosophical, indeed
gratuitous. We only know so far of the existence of a whole
multitude of psychic events. Naturally, therefore, we turn and
ask if any one or more of the psychic states can provide a
sufficient stimulus to elicit another. The question is really
simple once it is liberated from its cumbersome terminology.
Can a sensation elicit a thought, or a feeling of pleasure give
rise to a desire? Can the vision of something produce an
urging of the will? If so, it would seem that the principle of
causality can only drive us from one conscious event to an-
other, from thought back to sensation, from desire back to feel-
ing, or from a play of will back to the vision of something; in
other words, it would seem to be incapable of driving us out
beyond the sphere of conscious awareness.
Do not let us forget our main question. It is this. Do the
facts found in consciousness drive us out of consciousness to
posit a real extra-mental world? Whether or no, we must allow
at once that there seems no difficulty in admitting that one
psychological activity may provoke another. We must "go"
with the facts, and hope for the best. For instance, a visual
sensation of a certain shade of brown, accompanied by a certain


122 REALITY AND TRUTH
"feeling " of resistance, and possibly by associations of sweet-
ness of taste, may stimulate the thought "chocolate". The
thought and sensation together may easily give rise to a feeling
of pleasure, either by way of anticipation or remembrance.
The feeling may further lead to a characteristic movement of
desire, which in turn may command the motor-sensation of
what we call "grasping " or "taking" the chocolate.
Instances are not far to seek. The sight of a person whom
we dislike may give rise to an immediate feeling of anger; or
again the thought of some wrong may evoke a feeling of
resentment, and the two together may by gradual action and
interaction—the process is colloquially known as "working
oneself up "—generate a state of emotion or even passion.
In other words, our whole experience goes to show that one
psychological state or event can and does stimulate another.
Why, then, should the Principle of Causality lead us to seek
anything by way of stimulus, outside the range of conscious
phenomena?
Sensation, the Heart of the Problem.
The reason, while not being obvious, lies implicitly in the
facts that we have willingly admitted. At the basis of all
conscious phenomena of whatever kind, at the very starting-point
of all, lies the fact of sensation. Without sensation of some
kind, past or present, or at least without something of what
sensation leaves in our consciousness, to wit, a fund of imagery,
there could be no thought at all. I see a green light on a rail-
way gantry as I hurry through the darkness, and I know that
my train is due. The starting-point of the thought or judg-
ment is the visual sensation of green. I look at a light blue
stone, and think "turquoise ". It may all be wildly wrong and
capricious, of course, but the train of psychological events
began with a sensation of blueness. Or again, I sit back in my
chair, close my eyes, and think of the French Revolution.
Here are thoughts, indeed judgments and reasonings without
visual or auditive sensations. But how did these revived


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 123
thoughts or memories begin? Either with the visual sensation
of the print in some volume of history, or with the auditive
sensation of the voice of some speaker or professor. Without
sensation, either past or present, there could be no thought,
and, we may add, without one or other of these events, sensa-
tion, or thought, there would be no feeling.
We feel pleased or displeased, over-wrought or enervated, a
propos of something, some event or fact, something said or
done. Thus any one of these typical feelings, as a rule, follows
the trail either of sensation or thought, and is, in point of fact,
an "affective" process following upon "knowledge " of some
kind. Naturally we may all from time to time "feel" annoyed
for no apparent reason. If we are wise, we shall smile at our-
selves, and take a long solitary walk by way of a tonic to the
nerves.
But even in these cases, the "nerves" do not account for
everything. Indisposition of one kind or another may indeed
have predisposed us to irritability, so that an unusually small
stimulus may produce an unusually large reaction. All that is
obvious. The fact remains that even in these apparently irra-
tional feelings there is or has been something, even if it is only the
banging of a door, the delay of the post, the loss of a fountain-
pen, in short, some act of awkwardness or tactlessness which we
have observed. Feeling, in other words, like thought follows in
the wake of sense-perception. Once a sensation has been
perceived or experienced, the other events in consciousness
may run their course.
Thus we may run from a perception to a thought, and from
thought to feeling, and the whole "constellation" may issue
in a desire to do or to know something. Or we may pass
from sensation to imagery, from imagery to thought, and from
thought to the motor-sensation of executing some plan. To
take one last instance, we may start with a sensation, past or
present, move to thought, and both combined cognitive pro-
cesses may stimulate some emotion or even passion. Psycho-
logical events like other "things" in life are either simple,


i24 REALITY AND TRUTH
that is irreducible, or complex. In either case, they start with
some inner or outer sensorial event. The beginning of the
train of events, then, is always an actual or a past sensation,
pr the residue of sensation in one or other of the multitudin-
ous kinds of imagery. We are thus forced to admit, indeed we
admit willingly, that sensation may provide the requisite stimulus
for producing or setting in motion, however indirectly, all the
other psychic events, whether simple or complex. i
What Stimulates a Sensation?
What must be equally obvious, however, is that none of
these states, feelings, thoughts, desires, emotions, passions, can
of themselves produce a sense-perception, that is, a real
"cognitive" sensorial act. By thinking for ever—we use
"thinking " in the strict sense of a conceptual act—I cannot
bring about a sensation of redness, or let us say a muscular
sensation of resistance. I can talk and "think" about
"Faust" or "Don Giovanni" for a whole evening without
ever once hearing the music, while I think.
None indeed would dream of attempting to produce sensa-
tions by means of thoughts, as it seems patent that the effort t''
would be nothing short of a wilful act of self-deception or
hallucination. Imagery in the form of sights, sounds, scents,
tastes or what not may be sometimes exceptionally strong in
consciousness. It does not, however, lead us to confuse any
of these image-processes with a "real" sense-perception.
Similarly a feeling, say of pleasure, or even the most vehe-
ment act of the will in the shape of desire cannot evoke
sensations. We often enough desire what we may never be-
hold, and all of us from time to time desire in vain the
presence of friends or of those we love. Obviously, if feeling
or desire could elicit a sensorial act, I could, by desire alone,
summon a person to appear " in the grasp of my steady stare,"
"in the clutch of my steady ken " as did Browning in his poem
on "Mesmerism ".
Alas! our human experience lifts a solemn and often enough


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 125
plaintive voice against the very possibility. None of the con-
scious states, in other words, can produce a cognitive sensorial
act, which we style, for short, a sensation. Clearly, then, the
development of all these confused unsteady comings and goings
in consciousness is upward from and not downward towards
sensation. Granted an initial sensation, the rest may follow.
Now if sensation can either directly or indirectly provoke
the other conscious states, what in turn can stimulate a sensa-
tion? What is the force or agent or stimulus—something
there must be—which provided the first link in the psychic
train? Not the other conscious states, as we have briefly in-
dicated. Therefore since these sensorial activities undoubtedly
exist, and since they equally undoubtedly change, they must
have some stimulus which is not an event in consciousness.
Thus, at last, we see that there must be something outside the
range of all these psychological states of whatsoever kind.
Briefly, there must exist something other than conscious states
and solipsism, which denies the existence if that "other" is a
radical impossibility. Taken intrinsically, solipsism is unas-
sailable, but it can, as we now see, be shattered by an extrinsic
criterion, to wit, the Principle of Causality.
It would be both rash and illicit at this stage to suggest
that this necessary extrinsic "something" is the supposed
extra-mental world of real things. It might happen to be
some controlling spirit, some Force, Energy, Instinct or what
not, which in working upon us produced the phenomena of
vision, hearing, and the rest. Let us simply "go" with the
facts whithersoever they may lead us. For the present all we
know with a certainty that no doubt can possibly attain—it
comes from the simple application of an indubitable principle
to an undeniable fact—is that the flux of consciousness does
not exhaust the whole content of reality.
What, then, is the Necessary Extra-mental Stimulus?
Our next step forward is to inquire into the nature of this
something, this non-conscious stimulus of sensation, so that


i26 REALITY AND TRUTH
we may have something if not more positive, at least more
tangible to grasp. One difficulty must, however, be met be-
fore we speed along. It might conceivably be urged—indeed
a critic has urged—that we have assumed too much in talking
about the changes of consciousness, as though a sensation of
blueness did actually change into one of redness, or a feeling
of pleasure, let us say, into one of dissatisfaction.
"Assume," our critic may proceed, " that these are isolated
phenomena, simply successive events, separate and distinct
psychological existences, and your argument will prove point-
less. Assume, that is, that each psychological fact is as inde-
pendent of its fellows of the same kind, as rockets fired in the
night; that a sensation of blueness exists and passes; that a
successive sensation of redness springs into being, and then
lapses, like its independent predecessor, into nothingness.
Test your argument based upon the supposed changes, and
you will find that it collapses."
Now while observing that such an account of conscious-
ness is strangely untrue to our most intimate convictions, and
indeed to facts that can be proven, we may yet accept the
challenge. We shall, for the sake of our critic, assume all
that has been suggested. And then? Well: obviously these
isolated events of a sensorial kind come and go—pass, that
is, from nonentity into being and then lapse again into non-
entity. Each taken separately undergoes the most radical
of all changes—the passage from nothingness into existence.
Now as there was a time when this conscious state—the
vision of blue—did not exist, it cannot possibly have pro-
duced itself. To think of an absolute nothing becoming
something by means of its own inherent or creative powers
is to dream incoherently in terms of flagrant contradictions.
Thus the sudden appearance of these psychological events
must be explained by something other than themselves,
and we are forced, once again, to seek a stimulus or agent
outside of the range of consciousness. Whatever we suggest,
or whatever subterfuge we attempt, we are driven to this


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 127
striking and most important fact, that consciousness is not
the whole of reality, that there exists some "other ".
There is, then, some external agent or stimulus, a "some-
thing" outside consciousness which awakens sense-percep-
tion into being. We pass immediately to the next question.
What is it? Fortunately or otherwise, there is no direct or
easy way of settling the question without rushing to con-
clusions, or merely restating our common-sense beliefs. We
must therefore take the longer, and more satisfying road of
elimination, which, unlike many another avenue of argument,
not only yields a positive result, but also quietens even the most
fretful doubt. The inquiry, moreover, need not be too long-
drawn. Indeed all the possible relevant alternatives may be
exhausted, in making either singly or jointly three leading hypo-
theses, which we now turn to enumerate and consider.
The Possible Alternatives.
1. We may say that there is a person or self, a substantive
intelligent reality, in whom these states of consciousness, in-
cluding sensations inhere. We may suggest, that is, that outside
of the range of consciousness, below all the fleeting phen-
omena, there is a noumenon or extra-mental reality of a personal
type. This reality would somehow produce its own states;
provoke every passing sensation, feeling, and every other
psychological datum; and stimulate, in some unseen way,
either directly or indirectly, all that transpires throughout the
whole continuous range of consciousness.
2. Or we may suppose that there is some Spirit, or some
external Force or Energy, which works directly upon conscious-
ness, and awakens certain activities that are characterized as
sensations, thoughts, and the rest.
3. Or we may hold that there is an object-world of many
real things, which acts as the requisite stimulus for sensation.
This resultant sensation would thus be a real, cognitive process,
a grasping, in some sort, of things other than ourselves by
means of the activities which they elicit in consciousness.


128 REALITY AND TRUTH
There remains no other hypothesis to make, because every-
thing that can possibly be suggested falls under one of these
headings, or under one or other of the possible combinations
of the three. Briefly, the stimulus which operates upon con-
sciousness from without—the "something" outside of con-
sciousness—must be either a personal self, some Spirit, Force,
or Energy, or else a World of Matter.
At first sight each of the solutions seems equally tenable,
as each provides us with the stimulus which we were willy-
nilly driven to seek by our Search-Principle of Causality.
Yet as we examine the three solutions more closely and more
critically we find that the first two are not reasonable, that
they offend against other established facts, and that we are
left with the third possibility, the existence of a real material
world, as the only acceptable philosophic solution.
Let us take them in order, then, as we proceed with this
deeply interesting task of elimination.
Can the Stimulus be a Person?
I. The first hypothesis is that of a single person, a substan-
tive intelligent reality, who produces his own conscious states,
out of nothing, without reference to anything. If this sug-
gestion be taken as it stands, in isolation from any of its
fellow-hypotheses, there would exist throughout the length and
breadth of what we sometimes style "the Universe," just one
person, no more, no less, who creates his own transitory
conscious states. There would be no object-world of matter,
no other persons—one cannot insist upon this last fact too
effectively—nothing in fact but one intelligent reality which
elicits its own sensations and feelings, and all the events
that hurry to and fro within its fitful consciousness. Above
all there are no other persons. Reality is one: one noumenal
person, and one set of phenomenal conscious events.
The reason, too, is obvious. We set out with one group of
pyschological facts, and for that group, we sought, necessarily,
some stimulus from without. We have found all that we sought


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 129
in the one person—granted the tenability of this hypothesis—
and hence have no right to summon a whole army of persons
from nowhere. One tends to recoil instinctively from what
seems only another version of the much-despised solipsism.
Let us see, then, if we can find anything within consciousness
—obviously the only legitimate field of research—which may
serve as a guide to discuss the hypothesis. Our search will
involve a little excursion into the pleasant fields of psychology.
The following considerations therefore may be taken as a
lemma.
Our Feelings of Activity and of Passivity.
There are moods in which we feel active, and others in
which we feel that we are being acted upon. Rightly or
wrongly—it matters little—the feelings are as distinct as any-
thing that happens in our conscious lives. When we grasp
an object, contracting, as we say, the muscles of the hand,
we feel that we are doing something, that we are active agents.
Sometimes when we come to a decision we feel this char-
acteristic "glow " of activity, while at other times we merely
feel that we have surrendered our wills to forces that are
greater than ourselves. And instances might be multiplied
almost indefinitely.
It may be thought, perhaps, that this feeling of activity is
no more than the concomitant of a special type of muscular
or motor sensation, the immediate result, that is, of a certain
"tonicity" in one or other set of muscles. Possibly, in many
cases, this may supply an immediate partial explanation; but
clearly the ultimate problem still remains open. What, for
instance, produces or stimulates the muscular feelings? What
induces "tonicity"? What produces the lassitude and ab-
sence of muscular tonicity in our passive states? Obviously,
then, this " muscular" theory of our feelings of activity cannot
hope to be an ultimate explanation, nor, in any case, can it be
pressed too far without losing its dignity.
When, for instance, I sit back in my chair thinking out the
9


i3o REALITY AND TRUTH
difficulties in some speculative or practical problem, I feel
distinctly active. When, on the other hand, 1 sit in a reverie
near a "thoughtful" fire in winter, allowing the vagrant
association of many years to combine and fleet through my
listless consciousness, I feel distinctly passive. To explain
these phenomena, wholly and ultimately by the presence or
absence of certain muscular sensations, is surely to strain at
gnats. When I think, doubtless certain muscles—let us say
of the eyes and jaw—are held in a state of tension; but
equally well, though almost certainly to a less degree, the
same is true for cases of reverie.
This distinction, in fact, between feelings of activity and
passivity is one of the deepest and sharpest that we make.
Indeed the presence or absence of one of these feelings may
have consequences of untold importance in our lives. Let us
take a case in point. A terrible railway accident has happened
which has brought death and sorrow to many. The presence
of a feeling of passivity, and consequent responsibility at a
particular moment, may cause a lifetime of remorse for the
responsible agent in spite of the most pertinacious effort of
forgetfulness. The absence of that feeling may not only pre-
vent remorse, but also soften regret.
Again, a train-wrecker who has a feeling of activity at a
special moment may, finding the all-involuntary sting of self-
reproach unendurable, even commit suicide. Another, on
hearing the news, will regret it deeply, just as he would regret
the fact of some earthquake, land-slip, or other natural disaster.
He had no feeling of activity, and in consequence no re-
sponsibility. Could any difference, then, be more clear-cut
than that between these two feelings either in their im-
mediate characteristics or their results?
Passivity and Sensation.
Now it is a significant and undeniable fact that we all feel
passive at the moment of sense-perception. We are convinced
that we are undergoing an event, a sensation of brightness,


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 131
colour, sound or taste, which is not wholly of our own making.
We may indeed assure ourselves, on reflection, that we play a
not unimportant part in the affair by preparing ourselves and
placing ourselves in fitting circumstances, and perhaps by con-
centrating our attention; but we must also see at once that
something other than ourselves has worked upon us, yielding
the consciousness of passivity, or perhaps better, of receptivity,
and the sensorial knowledge at one and the same moment.
This, in fact, is an invariable rule. Even in the case of ex-
pectant attention, a man who looks for a watch that has fallen,
or an observer in our psychological laboratories who, after hear-
ing the signal, awaits the coming of the excitant, feels that he
has only prepared himself to see the watch, or to undergo
the given experience with ease and rapidity. We may sum-
marize our findings very briefly. To different states of con-
sciousness there are attached significant feelings of activity
and passivity, which are well-defined and clearly distinguished.
Secondly, in sense-perception we have a feeling of receptivity
or passivity.
Our "excursion" into psychology is at an end: we revert
to our immediate theme.
With these thoughts in mind, then, we may take up once
again our hypothesis of a single person who produces his own
conscious states which—it will be remembered—give "real"
knowledge of nothing, for outside of himself there is nothing.
Now if we are for ever producing our own sensations, and in-
directly, therefore, all our feelings, thoughts, and everything else
that transpires within us, why is it that some of them yield a
consciousness of activity and others of passivity? Why should
there exist this strange, deep-seated, even clashing difference,
which may even have far-reaching consequences in our moral
lives, if all the events flow from the same source, either directly
or indirectly? Surely, if the hypothesis were in ahy way ac-
ceptable, we—that is the intelligent reality or person—should
always be active, and events in consciousness ought at best
to register a sliding scale of activity. Why, then, does this
9*


i3a REALITY AND TRUTH
strange difference between activity and passivity present itself
at all?
And apart altogether from this incomprehensive difference,
which, if the hypothesis were true, ought not to exist, what
is to be said in defence of the feeling of passivity itself?
Why should we ever feel passive—moments of activity are
comparatively rare with us all—if we are for ever creating and
producing everything that happens throughout the vast domain
of consciousness? Yet it is a significant fact that in sensation-
processes, which form the indispensable starting-point of the
whole train of our psychological happenings, we do feel receptive,
or as we say usually passive—that we are being acted upon.
Obviously, therefore, every passive state of consciousness lifts its
voice against this extravagant hypothesis of a single person.
It would render sensations, which it is so necessary to explain,
utterly unintelligible. After all, we are only trying to organize
or integrate "our experience," and the hypothesis cannot stand
in defiance of these insistent and even dominating events in
consciousness.
Passivity and Feeling.
As the hypothesis is one which, in one form or another, is
apt to recur in the history of philosophy, we may be pardoned
for offering an additional destructive argument. We shall not
delay to indicate that the ideas of activity and passivity are in-
dispensable in the formation of languages, though the point is
one of undoubted importance. Let us leave sensation alone,
for our purpose, and turn to consider the feelings of pain and
distress, the hundred sorrows which we sometimes bear so rest-
lessly, and which pass like so many devastating storms through
consciousness. If the hypothesis of the personal reality be
true, then, I either directly produce all these states of emotion
and pain, or indirectly bring them into being by producing the
sensations or other phenomena which result in these feelings.
Do we then produce the pain which we should sometimes do
anything to avoid? Do we create the grief which may turn


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 133
day into night, and make of life one prolonged weariness of
the spirit? Do we, who long for happiness, create and per-
petuate by our own personal act the feeling of dissatisfaction
which dogs our path, and which, we sometimes think, mars our
whole lives?
If not, then the whole of this strange hypothesis must be
discarded. By itself at least it cannot stand against the plain
irresistible fact of the existence of passive states—states of
pain or of sensorial process—which obviously must be ex-
plained. To dismiss these facts, or to cast wilful suspicion on
their accuracy in the interests of any hypothesis, might in-
deed be theory-making or "principle-riding," but not philo-
sophy. We are thus lead to discard the first hypothesis. In
other words, we conclude that if there be a person at all, there
cannot simply be one person, and further, that this particular
reality or self cannot be the source and stimulus of these
changeful events in consciousness with which we started, and
to which we now revert.
Is the Extra-mental Stimulus a Spirit or Force and
not Matter?
II. The second hypothesis, which attempts to provide us
with the necessary extra-mental stimulus of conscious events,
is that of an Intelligent Spirit, or Force or Energy which would
somehow produce in us those conscious states of which we
are aware. According to this theory, which for the sake of
clearness we suppose taken in isolation from its companions,
there would exist no ordinary world of matter, no person, no
ego, no body, no soul; nothing in fact but a Spirit or Force,
and the accidental phenomena of sensations and thoughts—to
mention but two groups of conscious processes. Those sensa-
tions and thoughts, moreover, purport to give us knowledge
about a world of things, which, as a matter of fact, according
to this hypothesis, has no more reality than the phantasms
that awaken such fear in the minds of delirious persons. Once
again, it is clear that the explanation would suffice, as it pro-


134 REALITY AND TRUTH
vides us with the required stimulus from without. We have
only to ask if the suggestion is really coherent or reasonable.
What, then, is this Spirit or Force which we have invoked?
When and how did we ever come to think of the existence of
any such entity, in order even to make the hypothesis? What
is a spirit, anyhow, and how did we ever come to dream of
such a being? Now the answer is not very difficult to give.
From time immemorial we find traces of more or less definite
beliefs in the existence of some spirit, some god or gods, some
controlling Force or guiding Spirit. Men, it would seem, have
felt spontaneously that an unseen something was required
at every hand's turn in order to explain the existence, the
rhythmic changes, the destruction and death in the world of
things. Unquestionably, the belief in a world of real things
came first—it was never even asserted, as it lay too deep for
doubt or question: then came the beliefs in unseen powers,
whether Spirits or Forces, which controlled, and to some extent
explained the enigmatic comings and goings in the supposed
world of real things.
It is interesting to note parenthetically that this mute and
almost unconscious play of reason on the part of men may be
justified by the philosopher. Granted the existence of a real
world—a something, whatever its nature, that exists—and the
fact of change, the philosopher can, by a long and patient
series of considerations, prove the existence of one Control-
ling Spirit. All the difficulties and objections that have been
brought against the real valid arguments—they are few in
number and have often been seriously misstated—can be
answered satisfactorily, and thus, starting from a world of
things, some of which pass, some of which endure, all of which
change, we are driven by the facts of the case, and the most
inexorable logic to affirm the existence of a changeless, non-
material Being, a guiding, controlling Spirit.
The long and careful arguments of the philosophers were,
however, forestalled by the rapid intuition, or shall we say,
spontaneous play of reason of so many members of the human


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 135
race, who explained what they saw by some unseen Spirit or
Force. Be that as it may, one fact stands out beyond all
question. We should never have thought or even dreamt of
Spirits or Forces, were it not for the pressing necessity of ex-
plaining something, of rendering some account of the gaunt
facts of our life, and of the changing "real" world. So much
by way of parenthesis.
How Condemn a Primary by a Derivative Conviction?
Now, at this particular point in philosophy, we are examin-
ing the bases of our belief in the real world itself, or rather we
are trying to discover the nature of the stimulus or agency
which provokes our conscious states within us. The hypo-
thesis which we are considering—that of a Spirit or Force or
Energy, which, playing upon consciousness, yields illusory
cognitive processes—invokes the Spirit, and dismisses the
supposed real world to the limbo of inconsequent dreams.
That is to say, it invokes some spiritual being or some energy,
the existence of which would never have crossed the mind of
any living man were it not for the necessity of explaining the
supposed vast, changeful complex of things, in order to show
that the vast, changeful complex itself has nothing more than
the texture of a dream. It takes refuge, let it be observed, in
an unknown and incomprehensible being, which may never be
seen, never imagined—for imagination follows the trail of
sense-perception like a shadow—and never, by any chance,
understood.
We shall return to this point later. For the moment, it is
clear that this spirit or being, whoever or whatever it is, would
be little more than the "malin genie " of Descartes. It would
play upon consciousness, yielding the impression of inde-
pendent " real" persons and things ; producing types of " know-
ledge" within us, which were utterly illusory and perverse;
creating certitudes which would be less coherent than our most
whimsical prejudices. In fact, our whole conscious life, in
which "things" and "matter" play such an enormous part,


136 REALITY AND TRUTH
would, granted the truth of this supposition, be vitiated through
and through—no more than a chaos, or welter. In other
words, the hypothesis is one which invokes an unknown something
to explain the genesis of our sensations, feelings, thoughts, by con-
demning them all.
Our supposed conversations with friends would be merely
the trick of this unseen power, just a group of sounds signifying
nothing. Our supposed loves for one another, with all the
feelings they provoke, all the hopes and fears, would be nothing
more than the idlest and least coherent fancies which would grow
in our minds, persevere for a while and then languish, when the
Spirit or Force had withdrawn its capricious stimulus. The
actions and songs of the invisible Ariel in "The Tempest" would
be wisdom and providence itself, compared with this wearisome
catena of illusions.
If it is necessary as the result of a persevering inquiry to
condemn as twisted or unreliable some or all of our conscious
states, we shall be first to welcome the facts and to condemn
them unflinchingly. But we ask meditatively, is it not unrea-
sonable to call in the aid of a gratuitous hypothesis, which
really condemns them all without a hearing, and which finds
in the whole universe nothing more than an army of meaning-
less, conscious states that vibrate at the touch of some Force
or Spirit whose existence is both incomprehensible and pur-
poseless?
We have already shown that the genesis of the very idea of
this type of external agency depends upon our belief in the
real extra-mental world. To condemn the primary conviction
by means of one which is derivative and secondary, is to
argue in a tortuous and insecure, if not indeed in a cap-
ricious, manner. Genetically, the supposition stands con-
demned. If Proposition I supports Proposition II, it is worse
than unreasonable—it is positively ungrateful!—to use the
second to dismiss the first. The whole edifice sways and falls
like a tower of cards that cannot withstand the vibration of a
heavy footfall.


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 137
We may put the same considerations in a slightly different
way, without dealing with the interesting question of origins,
in order to bring the thought into high relief. The suggested
hypothesis invokes a Spirit or Force and dismisses the exist-
ence of matter as a plausible but unnecessary dream.
If Matter is Nothing, What is a Spirit?
Let us take the case of the spirit, first, and apply some of
those obstinate questionings which in the past have shattered so
many hopeful theories. What, for instance, is a Spirit? After
all, if a spirit is invoked, it is fair to ask a thorny question. In
attempting a description, or even a broad general idea, we
look around in vain for terms applicable to the spirit world
that contain the slightest trace of positive content. They do
not and cannot exist, for all our knowledge of whatsoever kind
is bound up with the actual or supposed existence of matter.
There cannot be any positive science of the immaterial as
such; all that we may know of a spirit or of the immaterial
world in general is given in negative terms. It is an twmaterial
reality: it is an *«extended, z/wponderable, ««quantified, im-
penetrable being, all of which knowledge, as the prefixes in-
dicate clearly enough, is negative. Briefly, a spirit is a being
which is not like "matter," and which, in consequence, does
not obey the supposed laws of matter; it is ««like matter in
structure and function.
Now if this hypothesis of a spirit be assumed, we dismiss
"matter" as an idle and unnecessary fancy, as literally non-
existence, and then we tur n and ask what can be said of
spirit. The poor negative epithets, inextended, unquantified
and the rest,i on which we relied for our only coherent notion,
valuable, though negative, disappear like so many ghostly
spectres into the night. We must begin somewhere: we can-
not forever chase negatives by negations, or construct a science
by hurling negative epithets at non-existence.
If, then, "matter" is no more than a loose idea, sprung
from nowhere—in passing, how could anyone even dream


■*' A"'.'
138 REALITY AND TRUTH
of matter if it is sheer non-existence?—all our epithets un-
qualified, inextended, imponderable, have no meaning beyond
being the negatives of certain illusory processes in conscious-
ness, and the term "spirit," in consequence, is void of any
shred of significance or association. What, then, if our hy-
pothesis be true, is a spirit? Only a "flatus vocis," a mean-
ingless sound with less power of arousing any coherent thought
or feeling, than the hooting of an owl or the screech of an
engine's whistle.
It is particularly difficult to grasp this train of thought on
account of our deeply-rooted conceptions about matter. Diffi-
culties might be brought forward by the score, but all turn on
the fact that our critic, after gaily denying the existence of a
material world, really continues to believe in matter with no
little energy. The denial seems easy, though in point of fact
it is wellnigh impossible. It is difficult to uproot the con-
victions of a lifetime, particularly when every thought and
nearly every word of our language proves a traitor to our
wish.
In order, therefore, to gauge the full impossibility of the
whole suggestion, it may be well to leave aside the discus-
sion of spirit, with all its peculiar difficulties and equivoca-
tions, and to seek some parallel elsewhere. Let us grant—
it is not difficult—that a square circle does not exist. I
can, however, coin the epithet "square-circular," which as
a word may ring in my consciousness, without producing
any meaning. Let us now add a prefix and form the new
ungainly term "un-square circular ". It would, we take it,
be readily granted that to explain the whole growth and
development of conscious events by having recourse to an
"un-square-circular" being would be preposterous to the
degree—shall we say?—of insanity. Yet we can only add
that an immaterial stimulus—if matter be dismissed as a
sheer illusion, without existence or meaning—is in about the
same plight as an "un-square-circular" agency. Both lie
under the same condemnation of being a meaningless jumble


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 139
of sounds, which in spite of their sonorous "ring" cannot be
treated seriously by the philosopher.
Again, in case anyone may think that the "square-circle"
parallel is a special case, let us take another example. I sit
back in my chair and coin a new word—a " ribapinet "—which
does not exist anywhere as a reality. That fact need not pre-
vent me from forming the epithets, "riba pinetal," and "unriba
pinetal ". But if I were suddenly to explain my conscious pro-
cesses, and more especially the rise of sensorial events by some
"unriba pinetal" agency, my case would obviously be desperate
and the reader would close the book hurriedly. He need not
be more merciful to the suggestion of an immaterial stimulus,
if " matter " is non-existent.
At this point some one who has a lingering respect for the
"Spirit, Force, Energy " hypothesis may try to make a stand.
"Granted," he may say, "your whole contention that spirit is
a negative concept, and that its positive counterpart matter is,
in our hypothesis, ruled out of existence, what of it? Even
though matter be an illusion, our negative concept, 'spirit,'
which as you say contains no trace of positive content, need
not be meaningless. If not meaningless, why dismiss the hypo-
thesis so abruptly? Because matter is non-existent it does
not follow that the term 'immaterial' can have no meaning:
because extension is an illusion, it does not follow that the
term 'inextended' is utterly meaningless. Why, therefore,
deal so cavalierly with this 'immaterial inextended' entity
which the hypothesis has invoked?"
At first sight the plea seems hopeful. Let us think again.
The hypothesis in question suggests that matter is non-
existent; that extension, quantity, weight, and all my other
positive impressions are, in consequence, nothing short of
hallucinations. Under the influence of the spirit I am for ever
conjuring up existences and impressions, which have no
reality, and no counterpart, however faint, in the scheme of
things. So far we understand. And the immediate con-
clusion? Obviously that all my positive thoughts and sensa-


i4o REALITY AND TRUTH
tions are as unfounded and unreal as the hallucinations of
afflicted persons.
From these positive conceptions I form negative ideas,
immaterial, ««quantified, iwextended and the rest. They at
least, says our critic, may have some meaning. Avowedly
they may have a meaning; but only in this supposed world
of hallucinations. "Immaterial " means "not like matter" or
not like something which does not exist, concerning which I
am subject to persistent delusions. "Unquantified'' means
"lacking quantity," lacking in some property about which,
though it does not exist, I am for ever undergoing hallucina-
tions.
Briefly, all positive and negative concepts are founded upon
experience of matter. If that matter be dismissed, we find
ourselves in a world of protracted illusions. The negatives
of the illusory concepts, though they may seem to have a mean-
ing, cannot be treated seriously by the philosopher.
If Matter does not Exist, What is Force or Energy?
We need not delay long in applying the same type of
analysis to the supposed Force or Energy, which, like the
spirit, would elicit the sensorial phenomena that purport de-
ceptively to bring us into contact with a world of extended
realities. What is a Force? What is an Energy? What
they may be we ignore: we only know what they are supposed
to do. On that account they are always explained exclusively
in terms of what they effect or what they are capable of effect-
ing, either by way of acceleration or work in the supposed
world of real things. Apart from such changes in material
things, which we style acceleration or work, neither of the
terms Force or Energy can have any real significance. They
are by their nature explanatory and derivative, and cannot
stand if their foundations are completely undermined. "All
the king's horses, and all the king's men," and all the literary
devices of granting them capital letters, cannot give them a
shred of meaning if matter does not exist. Let us therefore


THE EXISTENCE OF A REAL WORLD 141
refrain from employing them to "prove" the non-existence
of matter, certain aspects of which—if it exists—they may
enable us to measure and understand. Like the first hypo-
thesis, its second companion collapses on closer scrutiny. It
is incoherent.
One difficulty must, however, be met, before we speed to
our conclusion. It may be suggested, even forcibly, that
we have misstated the problem in dealing with this second
possibility. "Allow," our critic may urge, "that there is a
spirit which operates on many different minds, and you at
least avoid the idea of a Universe, which would consist ex-
clusively of one spirit, and one group of vibrating conscious
states."
Now we grant willingly that the restated suggestion looks
better, and seems far more reasonable, in fact more like the
contention of not a few "idealists" past and present. But
where in the world did this multitude of minds suddenly spring
from? Why are they supposed to exist? May we suggest
the application of a maxim, half ethical, half metaphysical, that,
"what is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander "? We,
after all, have progressed steadily and shown that the existence
of our conscious states could not be doubted, and that we
were driven to seek a stimulus outside of consciousness. So
far so good. But we cannot see how anyone who takes this
path can suddenly start multiplying these conscious realities
without rhyme or reason, proof or argument. Whence do all
these many minds suddenly emerge? As we saw clearly at
the opening of this chapter, the debate lies not between
idealism and realism, but between solipsism and its contradic-
tory.
Moreover, even if we granted an indefinite multiplication
of minds, the supposition of a Spirit, Force, or Energy cannot
escape the charge of meaninglessness, once we condemn
"matter" and the material world to the realm of illusions or
of ontological non-existence.


142 REALITY AND TRUTH
The Hypothesis of a Real World holds the Field.
III. With the ruin of the first two hypotheses, we are left
with the third of our original trio as the only tenable theory.
This, it will be remembered, explains the rise and growth of
our typical conscious states by the existence and agency of a
real extra-mental world of persons and things which acts upon
us and of which in consequence we have some cognizance,
however slight and elusive, in sensation and thought. We shall
attempt to unravel the implications of the theory, and its
epistemological bearings in the chapters which follow.
For the moment it is essential to grasp that we have arrived
at a conclusion of extraordinary depth and importance, by a
process which, if somewhat long, is at least unfailingly clear.
We endeavoured first, after clearing the ground, to doubt cer-
tain principles, and found the task futile—something utterly
beyond the range of our powers. One of these principles, the
rather obvious law of contradiction, had a pendent in the
principle of causality, the validity and applicability of which
we were thus enabled to establish. The application of the
causal law to our conscious states, whose existence we strove
in vain to doubt, and more particularly to the phenomenon of
sensation, produced the inevitable and firm conviction of the
existence of something, an agency of some kind, which in some
way operated on consciousness from without.
For the rest, our discussion of the nature of that agency
followed the long trail of elimination. We set up all the
possible alternatives which, we found, could be reduced to
three typical standard forms. On closer scrutiny, without
"serving any cause," we were driven to dismiss two of the
suggested solutions, on account of their inability to explain
established facts, or on account of their intrinsic unreasonable-
ness. We were thus left with the third hypothesis as the
philosophic answer to a difficult question. We close our search
with the satisfying conclusion that we stand facing a real world
of persons and things.


CHAPTER VII.
OUR ORASP OF REALITY.
At the close of our first chapter we enumerated the five in-
sistent, outstanding questions in the theory of knowledge.
The first two ran as follows :—
i. Can we know and prove that there exists outside us a
real world of persons and things, to some extent at least in-
dependent of our consciousness?
2. Can we know the nature of that reality: not only that it
exists, but what it is?
To the first question we may now give a decided, affirma-
tive answer. We can indeed both know and prove that there
exists an extra-mental world of persons and things. There is
no reason to assume that this world is one in its solid single-
ness, and we shall see later that there is abundant reason for
asserting a multitude of real existences. That such a world
exists, to sum up sharply, is the result of our work to date.
Without making any assumption, however reasonable, with
the fullest desire to face all the difficulties that cling like so
many burrs in this enthralling study, by means of the most
far-reaching doubts and by questions that seem persistent
enough, we have been led to establish certain inviolable
principles, and in addition the great outstanding fact of a
real, material world.
To those who have never faced the complexities of these
tangled problems, the whole work may seem "much ado about
nothing ". But even the least friendly ultra-realist critic may
be pleased to hear that our method of answering the first
question which we have catalogued leads us almost inevitably
143


144 REALITY AND TRUTH
to give a constructive, satisfying answer to the second. We
shall see that our knowledge of the nature of reality is by no
means inconsiderable, though the conditions of its validity may
be somewhat stringent. Having answered the first question,
therefore, we turn at once to prepare an answer to the second,
which runs: Can we know the nature of reality; not only that
it exists, but what it is?
So much for a connection of our present thought with our
first statement of the problems of knowledge. It may be as
well to add a second connecting-link with the summary at the
close of our fourth chapter, so that the whole of our findings
may be held together with ease as we march forward "to
occupy new positions, according to plan ".
It may be remembered that in our fourth chapter we made
an inventory of the elements that go to make the corpus of our
knowledge. We found that all our knowledge is composed of
simple data—sensations and concepts—and judgments which
may be either immediate or mediate. We added at the time
the following words: "Our inquiry into the validity of mediate
judgments (which depend upon some process or proof), with
all their ornate trappings of hypotheses, postulates, principles,
reasonings, facts, may be entirely suspended for the moment.
They depend wholly upon the adequacy of the simple data,
and the validity of the immediate judgments. It might seem
advisable, therefore, to begin by discussing and criticizing the
data. That course, however, is quite impossible, until we have
established and proven the existence of an fexternal real world
to which these data purport at least to have reference. Now
in order to prove the existence of the extra-mental real world,
we must use certain principles which fortunately or otherwise
are immediate. We are thus forced by the nature of our in-
quiry to turn aside for the moment from the simple data, and
to address ourselves to the critique and doubt of certain im-
mediate judgments or principles. To the data we shall return
later, when they can be adequately 'set,' criticized, and ex-
plained."


OUR GRASP OF REALITY 145
In the intervening chapters, we have discussed and tried in
vain to doubt the relevant group of immediate judgments or
principles. Driven from point to point, we have further been
forced to concede the existence of world of real things. Now,
then, we are in a position to revert to the elementary data, to
sensations that is, and concepts, or to put it more broadly, to
our means of coming in contact with the world of things or
of "grasping " reality. Our work in hand is to examine our
psychological equipment in order to discover what our cogni-
tive processes really are, how many there are, and what they
purport to effect.
We have reached the conclusion that we stand facing a
world of real things; but, as we have already suggested, the
conviction of its existence for the mass of men—about whom
at last we can speak with confidence and ease!—is not in any
sense the outcome of a reasoned argument or of an inductive
process. It is given, to most of us at least, immediately as a
datum beyond doubt or question, by a kind of processless
intuition which ignores all argument. True, this intuition of
reality can be justified by a long and patient inquiry, as we
have shown; but the whole treatment is only a necessary
philosophic justification of the earlier conviction: it solidifies
and guarantees the accuracy of the immediate intuition. Now
we turn and ask, How is that intuition itself effected, or what
comes to the same, What are our means of knowing anything?
Two Distinct Processes of Knowledge—Intellect and
Sense.
From first to last our answer depends upon one of the most
important facts of psychology, to wit, that we possess two dis-
tinct cognitive processes, two ways of knowing or apprehend-
ing things, the one sensorial, the other intellectual. We must
therefore delay in order to justify this radical and far-reaching
distinction. Naturally, as we are not writing a treatise on
psychology, we need not raise all the contradictions and heated
debates, the strange wanderings and stranger prodigal returns
10


146 REALITY AND TRUTH
which mark the history of this question. Suffice it to say that
it proved a cardinal point in the philosophy of the greater
Greeks; that it tortured the philosophers of the middle
ages for three long centuries before they finally adopted the
forgotten teaching of Aristotle: and lastly that it may be
regarded, at least in its ramifications, results, and implications,
as one of the storm-centres in the thought of the last two
centuries.
Philosophers have never tired of teaching that intellect is a
development of sensation, that our intellectual processes of
conceiving ideas, linking them in judgments, and manipulating
the judgments by various ways of reasoning, are only the work /
of sensation, purified, sharpened? refined, "sublimated," or of
sensation, schematized and rendered more "general ". In
other words, according to these theories which have abounded
in the past, intellectual operations are ultimately reducible to
things sensorial, and our two means of knowledge, intellect and
sense, differ not in kind but in degree.
We beg, on the other hand, to submit a totally different
group of suggestions, which go to show that intellect and sense
are each ultimate and irreducible elements or factors in conscious-
ness; that no sharpening, refining, or sublimating of sensation
can possibly produce any one of the three characteristic mani-
festations of what we style "intellect"; briefly that we have
two different and distinct means of knowledge at our disposal.
As the point is obviously of singular importance in any
thorough treatment of knowledge, we may be readily pardoned
for devoting a whole chapter to these deeply interesting psy-
chological observations. By thus looking inward attentively
we shall find ourselves well-equipped to discuss our power
of looking outward, of " grasping" the real world.
Concepts and Sensations Differ Psychologically.
In order to get down to facts at once, let us concentrate our
attention on the extraordinary difference between general ideas
or concepts and sensorial processes, taken and scrutinized just


OUR GRASP OF REALITY 147
merely as conscious events. We are obviously not attempting
to construct a metaphysic or doctrine of reality, nor will what
we say have any connection with a Platonic or other theory of
ideas. We are only anxious for the moment to discover and
register the precise differences between concepts and sensorial
processes, as they come and go in the stream of our interior,
psychological "experience ". What, then, is the difference be-
tween these phenomena, qua phenomena, as they fleet through
consciousness?
To answer the question we may as well take a judicious
selection of words or terms which we habitually pass as
cheques on the fund of our knowledge; present them to our-
selves; and then register by introspection the significant and
different happenings in consciousness. What is here set down
with all brevity is the result of long and carefully co-ordinated
sets of experiments, but the reader who is interested may check
the results for himself.
Let us then make three small groups of terms. Into the first
place let us say a few words of general significance, like nation,
force, receptacle, student, king. Into the second put a few proper
names, which obviously have a particularized meaning—say,
England, Cheap side, Hamlet, King Edward VII. Into the
third and last group put a few nonsense-words, made up on the
spur of the moment, which can be pronounced but which have
no meaning. Our reason for this—really only a foil for the
sake of comparison—will appear later. For the moment let
the words stand as klimpoc, torcam, utrebaf. The reader has
never heard them before? Neither have we.
The first set, it will be observed, contain what are called
"universal" terms, as they are equally applicable to all the
individuals or objects of the same class: the second set is
made up of words that apply simply to one place or person:
the last set containing the unmusical trio, has obviously no
trace of any possible or actual application. We are clearly in
presence of a sliding scale of applicability. Now let us give
ourselves the words to think about, one by one of course,


i+8 REALITY AND TRUTH
and then see what transpires in consciousness by an accurate
and exhaustive introspection.
Introspection of the Thought-Process.
In the case of the first set I find that I have a dominant all-
pervading "consciousness of meaning "; that there rings and
resounds through my consciousness a knowledge of the impli-
cation of the words, of the "essences " or "natures" to which
they apply. Indeed this "consciousness of meaning" is so
very full and insistent, that it is almost easy to pass it over in
silence as one searches for its less-important and sometimes
trivial concomitants. To express this meaning, or knowledge,
I might be forced to pile phrase upon phrase to the extent al-
most of writing a small essay. In consciousness it is given in
some condensed, compact way.
A simple instance may elucidate the point. Let us give our-
selves the word "king," and see what happens. I see or hear
the word, have, that is, a well-defined sensorial impression,
and pass almost immediately to the "consciousness of mean-
ing ". "King " means for me something very definite—some-
thing which we may express by such ideas as pre-eminence,
government, sovereignty, dominion, influence, prerogative,
power, heredity, and nobility of birth. However roughly
sketched, this gives some vague idea of what occupies the
focus of my consciousness.
In addition, images of various kinds may come and go.
I may have in mind a picture of a jewelled crown, or perhaps
a more or less defined representation of Holbein's portrait of
Henry VIII or of one of Van Dyck's paintings of Charles I.
Possibly, if I am more given to " sounds " than "sights," more
auditive than visual, I may "hear" the voice of some king,
whose conversation or speech I have heard. So far, then, we
find two kinds of content: first the significant consciousness of
meaning, and next, a certain amount of incidental imagery
which "bobs" in and out of consciousness in a way that is
distincdy casual.


OUR GRASP OF REALITY 149
There may also be a multitude of associations either fully or
half awakened, which often enough come and go while the
dominant meaning persists. "King," in other words, may
arouse associations of droll sayings, of wise, impetuous or fool-
ish actions, of Machiavellian diplomacy, or what not. If, how-
ever, we only allow the word "king" to occupy our attention
for a short interval, say for one second, or a second and a half
—so that the subsequent introspection may be sufficiently fresh
and vivid—we shall probably find that these associations will
only be suggested somewhere near the margin of consciousness.
Often enough they merely seem to be playing a game of " hide
and seek " out near the fringe of the whole process.
Here, then, apart from a number of details of subsidiary in-
terest, is the main summary of our findings. "King " gives us
(1) a consciousness of meaning, (2) a fund of imagery of one or
more kinds, (3) a group of associations, fully or half developed,
apposite or irrelevant. A feeling of reverence or of anger that
might accompany the passing of " king " through the conscious-
ness of a royalist or republican would admittedly be a matter
of little importance for us in our present study.
Now we may turn to sum up, or rather to assign values to
the various factors. During the short interval of our experience
—we are freeing the whole discussion from the necessary
training of observers, the immediate preparation by signal, the
arrival of the excitant, and all the other experimental trappings
—the imagery and the associations are at best of secondary
importance. They tend to flit in and out of the sphere of con-
scious awareness, with obvious nonchalance, while the psycho-
logical content which seems to "define" the term, remains
constant—a consciousness of meaning, a steady illumination
of the conscious "field ". Sometimes no actual associations
are present, and we feel no more than the power of develop-
ing a certain number of them if required. Sometimes no
imagery of any kind, whether schematic, blurred, or realistic
can be detected even by the closest and most impartial of
observers, once the initial perception of the term "king"


ISO REALITY AND TRUTH
which set the whole process in motion has been left
behind.
It is clear, then, that in the case of these so-called "uni-
versals," the dominant and all-important factor is the con-
sciousness of meaning or what we, greatly daring, have styled
the illumination process.
What, then, is this "consciousness of meaning "? It is not
a feeling of any kind, seeing that it can be sharply distinguished
from the feelings of tension, pleasure, or pain, which may often
accompany the effort of thought. It is not a sensation nor is
it bound up with the imagery, which past sensations have left
at my disposal. The images may and not infrequently do
accompany "the consciousness of meaning," without ever
causing or suggesting the least trace of identification of one
with the other. Frankly they appear incidental, if not acci-
dental when compared with the "illumination" itself. It is
not an association or group of associations, because these
latter, however vagrant or insistent, are marked off with no little
precision from this consciousness of meaning as something
secondary, something that may come and go leaving the central
point of consciousness, the focal illumination, serenely un-
affected.
This "consciousness of meaning," a steady significant psy-
chological fact, is therefore non-affective, non-imaginal, non-
sensorial, non-associative. Without developing any particular
theory on the point, we shall refer to it in future as a type of
intellectual knowledge. It is clearly knowledge of a kind, and
as it is irreducible to sensation, imagery, or any other lower
complex, we may safely call it intellectual. So much for our
findings after a brief review of the words in the first or "uni-
versal" set.
The Consciousness of Particulars.
We may now pass along to consider the second set, the
group of " particulars" which are applicable only to one place
or person. In order to have a good standard of comparison
with our chosen universal, "king," let us select the particular


OUR GRASP OF REALITY 151
"Edward VII," present it to ourselves, as a stimulus for a short
concentrated process in consciousness and then "take stock"
of the whole proceeding.
Again we find the "consciousness of meaning"—king—
asserted in consciousness with unabated vigour; though now
it may seem less central, less important. In addition there
may be other "meanings " which assert themselves in a similar
way, such as diplomat, sportsman, and the like, according to
our predominant impressions of the late king. Possibly
"diplomat" may occupy the central place among the il-
luminating ideas, and put the thought of king into the shade
or even force it completely into the background. The scope
for individual differences in such points is wellnigh illimitable.
Apart, however, from special and unusual cases, which we need
not stay to consider, there will be present some illuminating
idea or "consciousness of meaning" like king, sportsman,
diplomat, or possibly all three taken one after the other. In
other words, the particular term "Edward VII" gives rise,
among other things, to at least one "universal" idea—an in-
teresting fact of more than usual significance to which we shall
revert later.
Together with the controlling idea—we pass to the second
element of our introspective data—there will now certainly be
some imagery, which, relatively stable in consciousness, helps
to "define " Edward VII. Probably for most there will be a
visual image of some portrait or photograph of the king, or
possibly an image "in three dimensions" of some bust or
statue or of the living king as he himself appeared. Naturally
too, other people instead of having pictures by way of imagery,
may hear a sound, let us say, the characteristic timbre and
pitch of the late king's speaking voice.
Thus imagery of some kind will be found, if the scrutiny
be sufficiently close, and unlike the images that came and went
—as though conscious of their irrelevance—when I thought
of "king," the defining image of "Edward VII," whatever it
be, lingers in consciousness as an integral and important part


I52 REALITY AND TRUTH
of the process. In the effort to hold "a particular" in con-
sciousness, apparently something other than "universal" con-
cepts, like king, diplomat, statesman, and the rest—which taken
simply or collectively might be applied to a multitude of
crowned heads—must play a co-defining part in the mental con-
stellation.
In addition to the ideas and imagery, a number of associa-
tions may appear, or announce themselves as ready to appear
by some distinct feeling of familiarity, or by some conscious-
ness of power to revive a group of past impressions. Over the
remaining, subsidiary affective processes which may be aroused
we may pass in silence.
Summing up, then, we find that in the case of a "parti-
cular," like "Edward VII" or Cheapside, there will be a
sensorial element—for images and personal associations are
always sensorial in kind, being nothing more than the revival
of past sensations—and in addition a fairly well-defined in-
tellectual element. Once again we are not writing a treatise
on psychology, and so unfortunately cannot cite the many ex-
periments which go to support these facts of observation.
Let the reader experiment for himself. In general it will be
found that while one can think the universal without imagery
—need we repeat that the starting-point is always some sensa-
tion or image, and that we are only referring to the developed
"thought " ?—it is impossible to think the particular—at least
to consider its actual particularity—without the play of some
individual image or association.
With a turn of our thought we find ourselves in a moment
face to face with our initial theme. We wish to show that in-
tellect and sense provide two irreducible modes of knowledge,
that they differ essentially and radically. Here at last in
contemplating the particular—one of our most frequent psycho-
logical performances—we find that the imaginal or sensorial
content is held in consciousness side by side with the illuminating
idea or intellectual element. They are as clearly distinguished
in my immediate consciousness as a colour from a sound, or


OUR GRASP OF REALITY 153
as a bitter taste from the thought of justice. Our findings,
therefore, in the case of "particular" terms go fully to sup-
port our review of their "universal" colleagues. Intellect
and sense are two irreducible elements, and in consequence we
have two distinct ways of apprehending things.
The Consciousness of Nonsense Words.
Lastly, in order to find a standard of comparison, and
to assure ourselves that these "consciousnesses of meaning"
are more than usually real, let us consider our nonsense
words, klimpoc, torcam, utrebaf. What happens when we
"think " about torcam t The outstanding fact is that there is
no " illumination " of consciousness: the word has no meaning.
One feels a conscious void, a sense of being frustrated in one's
effort to grasp something. "It seems very pretty," as Alice
said when she had finished " 'Twas brillig and the slithy toves,"
"but it's rather hard to understand." It awakens no imagery,
no associations, no feelings of any kind; nothing in fact but a
few irrelevant philological speculations for those who are given
to theories about the derivations of words. For most of us
there is nothing more than a dull, meaningless repetition of
the sensuous impression, of the appearance of the written word
or of its sound as spoken.
As a foil the experiment is not without its importance.
After "toying" with nonsense words, we may take up once
again—not without a sense of liberation—a term like nation,
empire, or king. The psychological reaction is specifically
different, and may enable us to realize more fully what is meant
by a non-sensorial "illumination " or "consciousness of mean-
ing".
The two types of knowledge, sensorial and illuminative,
stand out, therefore, with no lack of clearness or precision.
The intellectual consciousness of meaning is expressed in
"universals," while the sensorial consciousness of particular
attributes, qualities, or properties is given in sense-impressions
or images of one kind or another. Sometimes the sense-impres-


i54 REALITY AND TRUTH
sions are bound together and expressed in a particular term, like
Cheapside. More often, as in the case of river scene or land-
scape, we vainly strive to express their real particularity by
adding epithet to epithet, trying, as it were, to tighten the ring
of universals about our "particular " quarry. To the question
of their expression, however, we shall turn later. For the
moment, we submit that these two distinct modes of knowledge
are both given in consciousness.
The fact that the modes are really distinct has been
challenged almost unceasingly. Philosophers seem loathe to
concede that sensation and intellect differ in kind. Ingenious
efforts, in consequence, have been made to reduce the intel-
lectual "concept " or idea to some refined play of the sensorial
process. We can only plead that the facts which we have cited
without any polemical purpose, do not tend in the least to
support this contention. As, however, the point is of consider-
able importance in our treatment of knowledge, we turn will-
ingly to consider two typical and rival explanations of the facts
of consciousness.
The Doctrine of the Blurred Image.
And first we may take the doctrine that a concept or idea is
no more than a blurred image. The concept, according to
this theory which we now proceed to state, would result from
the same process as sensation. In presence of an object we
enjoy, say the protagonists of the theory, a sense-perception
which fades away, leaving a certain fund of imagery as a
residue in consciousness. But sense-perceptions and images
are " particular," applicable only to one object, and in order to
economize our conscious effort, we require something in the
shape of a general idea, which may be applicable to many
different objects of the same class or species. To register
nothing but particulars would weary the veriest Titan. In
answer, then, to this demand for psychic economy, the
image which at first lacked no vividness and no element of
particularity undergoes a generalizing development. It be-


OUR GRASP OF REALITY 155
comes less clear, less particular, "blunted," in fact, and
blurred. Once reduced to this generalized state, the developed
image serves admirably as a "rough and ready" psychological
equivalent for numerous things of the same kind.
Instances may be said even to abound. If I study biology,
I look through a microscope at multitudes of living cells. I
cannot carry all these particulars with all their individual
peculiarities in consciousness, nor preserve them in memory.
Little by little, therefore, one picture comes to represent all
living cells, and thus to bz applicable to many different objects
which ars distinct in almost innumerable details. Some of my
first images have, thus, by an imperceptible series of changes,
become less clear, less aggressively particular, "blunted, in
fact, and blurred". The resulting, generalized, schematized
image, to which by long use I have grown accustomed, tends
to be less insistent in consciousness and, in consequence, to be
overlooked on introspection. Unmindful of what is present
though unobserved, some of us are impulsively led to think
that concepts are separate phenomena, really distinct from all
imagery, whereas the concept is the blurred image, no more
and no less.
In a similar way to the biologist, a student of anatomy comes
to have a blurred image or concept, which represents all
human skeletons in his thought. Or, to take one last case of
a more ordinary kind, I think of a king. At first my thought
will be of one particular king, with all his individual char-
acteristics of appearance and bearing. But, little by little, I
manage to dissolve the individual notes from my visual image,
to attach more and more importance to the symbols and
notes of kingship, and finally to develop a vague schematic
picture of a man, crowned, wearing royal apparel, and bear-
ing a sceptre, which will serve to represent all the kings of
the earth of all times. My concept of king is this generalized
image.
The theory of the blurred image is, beyond question, both
"clear and distinct". Where, then, does it fail?


156 REALITY AND TRUTH
Criticism of the "Blurred Image" Doctrine.
The only test of the theory is to see how far it meets and
interprets the psychological facts which are brought to light by
introspection. That blurred images exist, of course, is beyond
doubt. Many of us have in addition to those already mentioned
quite a number of these "outline " representations for " moun-
tain," "watershed," "valley," "river," "sea," "lake," "book,"
"statue," "picture," and the rest. They occur frequently
enough in consciousness, and can readily be described with
any required degree of precision by a well-trained observer.
But there area multitude of " universal " terms to which there
are no corresponding generic images. Speaking for ourselves,
we at least have no such schemata, for the terms diplomat,
statesman, president, judge, student, chair, camera, nor for a
number more. Imagery of an incidental and casual type may
present itself in many of these cases, but such images make
no claim to be either generic or representative. Yet in all
occasions when I present myself with these terms, I have a
well-defined "consciousness of meaning," or concept.
When "blurred images " play a part in the unfolding of some
conscious process, we can detect them with ease and rapidity.
On the other hand, when, after peering into every "angle"
and "corner " of consciousness, we register not the presence but
the definite absence of these "generalized " images, our state-
ment of fact must be accepted as final. Briefly, a "conscious-
ness of meaning" or concept may be present, without even the
accompaniment of a blurred image. To identify the two pro-
cesses is therefore impossible. But there is more.
Let us revert to the case of "king," and let us grant that
we are in possession of some outline picture of a man, bearing
the symbols of kingship, which somehow stands for "king" in
our consciousness. On presenting ourselves with the word
"king," we shall find (i) a consciousness of meaning, or what
we have referred to as a steady illumination of the conscious
"field," and (2) the representative blurred image. Without


OUR GRASP OF REALITY 157
the "consciousness of meaning," the blurred image would
lack all real significance. The "vivid," "plastic" imagery of
everyday life possesses no illuminating power in consciousness.
It is there, it is given: that is all. The "blurred image,"
once dissociated from some controlling idea, would be in the
same plight. It would be given: it would illuminate nothing,
for there would be nothing to indicate either its "meaning"
or the range of its applicability.
This point can scarcely be insisted upon too forcibly. Let
us, therefore, take a few parallel cases, so that there may
be no lingering doubt. In presence of a Chinese or Pali text,
we ourselves would have a well-defined visual impression or
image, but unfortunately no "consciousness of meaning ". It
would be present in our consciousness as a datum of sense,
and that is all. Similarly, when we are "half-asleep," a whole
procession of visual images may file through our consciousness,
hurrying to and fro, leaping from century to century, from place
to place, in unrestrained, meaningless, purposeless confusion.
The images are present, but "the consciousness of meaning"
is not there to illuminate the process. Such instances show
all too clearly that sensations and images, of themselves, have
no meaning, and no application.
And the "blurred image" of the psychologists? Like all
its companion processes, it would of itself be a datum without
significance, and, above all, without trace of general, repre-
sentative power, apart from the accompanying work of intelli-
gence, which discovers meanings and applications. As, there-
fore, the blurred image, when it appears in its representative
character, is found side by side with the intellectual "conscious-
ness of meaning," it is well not to confound two processes
which are not only distinguishable but even separable. The
theory which identifies them is, we submit, untenable.
The Appeal to the Subconscious.
A second rather more subtle attempt has been made within
recent years to level down the supposed intellectual knowledge


158 REALITY AND TRUTH
to sensorial processes, and to the general phenomena of as-
sociation. According to this theory, the "awareness of mean-
ing " is undoubtedly asserted in consciousness, but does not in
the least argue the existence of a separate intellectual element.
True, this "consciousness of meaning" is not confounded with
imagery;. it is ascribed to the incipient play of associations, to
the half-stirred condition of a multitude of reproductive ten-
dencies, below the threshold of consciousness. The domi-
nant "consciousness of meaning" is thus made once again
to exemplify the law of psychic economy. If I liked to
exert myself I might develop a number of relevant images
a propos of a given term. As it is, I am content that the
associated ideas should be aroused to a state of preparedness,
that they should be ready, at call, to make an appearance in
consciousness. "The associated ideas need not actually ap-
pear; the reproductive tendencies need not discharge their
full function; the half-arousal, the sub-excitation suffice to set
up a determinate, unequivocal reference, which manifests itself
in consciousness as a knowledge or meaning."1
Thus when a term with a meaning is presented, many associa-
tions of eye and ear formed in the past tend to spring into
consciousness. Even before they appear, we feel their coming,
and the fact of their presence even below the threshold of
awareness, gives us a consciousness of meaning, a sense of
familiarity and of being "at home" with the term. Where
there are no such associations, as in the case of nonsense words,
we feel the void, for there is nothing ready to leap over the
limen, into the sphere of " awareness ". The theory seems not
only "clear and distinct" but even picturesque. Why, then,
does it fail?
Criticism of the Appeal to the Subconscious.
To get to "grips " at once, there is only one fatal objection
to this "sub-excitation" theory. It attempts to explain a real
•Titchener, "Experimental Psychology of the Thought Processes,"
p. 105. The theory is that of Ach.


OUR GRASP OF REALITY 159
significant fact of consciousness, to wit, the meaning which
occupies the focus of our attention, by something which is
not in consciousness at all. That associations may be half-
stirred, ready to assert themselves, we need not question. But
when the associations, fully stirred, enter the circle of con-
sciousness, they can be distinguished with every possible
degree of clearness from the consciousness of meaning. They
do not "illuminate," nor contribute to the meaning, which is
already present: they only appear as an incidental group of
associated ideas, linking up the present with the past . If,
therefore, a fully developed association does not define the
meaning, why should its half-stirred companion enjoy this
extraordinary power?
Besides, we may ask, what is a half-stirred association, here
and now? Nothing more than a tendency, or at best, an un-
developed beginning of some process. To explain an actual
fact in consciousness, by an undeveloped beginning of some
process below the threshold, is not a felicitous effort. Once
stripped of its picturesque metaphors of associations holding
themselves in readiness to leap over the limen, and the rest,
we find the thought not a little vague as indeed are most
theories that plunge into the obscure sub-conscious region.
Why should a half-stirred association, or a whole army of them
make me think in a way which we express by terms like
"sovereignty, dominion, prerogative, nobility " in presence of
the word "king"? No! Associations, whether fully or parti-
ally developed, might help to explain a general feeling of
familiarity, as they tend by their very nature to link up the
past with the present. They cannot hope to explain the
central consciousness of meaning, which is non-affective, non-
sensorial, non-imaginal, but, in point of fact, intellectual.
We have only briefly indicated something of all that might
be said to prove the existence of two distinct kinds of know-
ledge. Let the indication suffice, so that we may pass to
consider some of the typical differences between the two
modes.


160 REALITY AND TRUTH
Outstanding Differences between Sensorial and
Intellectual Knowledge.
The first leading characteristic of sensorial knowledge which
distinguishes it from the generalizing play of intellect, is its
inherent, obstinate particularity. Sense-impressions of what-
soever kind, together with the imagery that follows in their
train—in fact the whole sensorial coefficient—is signed and
sealed with these individual, "one and one only " characteristics.
An auditive impression will have a certain timbre, pitch, and
intensity, or if it be a mere noise, a degree of loudness and
sharpness, which will mark it off for the trained observer from
all other sounds. A visual image, whether it be of an object
or a something which floats idly through my imagination, will
have a certain colour, brightness, shape, extension, depth, or,
if not all, at least some of these qualities to distinguish it
clearly enough from all other images of a similar kind. Even
a schematic image, such as the diagram of a watershed, or of
a living cell in a textbook on biology is always particular. It
may be made to stand as a representative for all watersheds or
all living cells, but the diagram itself, apart from some illu-
minating idea, is as particular as any other sense-impression.
Granted a whole string of conventions, and the postulate of
its representative character, the diagram may be given an
added significance. Of itself as it appears in consciousness,
it is just as particular as a group of colours seen for a fleet-
ing second in an autumn sunset. Briefly, no sense-impres-
sion, and no image can ever be anything but particular. Their
qualities and innumerable details mark them off as single,
isolated experiences.
Knowledge of the intellectual type, on the other hand, is
strangely different. It can never by any chance be particular:
it is and must necessarily be general. A true concept is a
thought which is equally applicable to every member of the
same class. "Being," for instance, is applicable to everything
that exists on land or sea, in Heaven or on earth. "King,"
too, is applicable to every crowned head that may ever have


OUR GRASP OF REALITY 161
been. These terms or concepts are almost unlimited in the
range, and on that account have been styled "universals".
The word is not felicitously chosen; though of course every
philosopher, like Humpty-Dumpty, has the right to say, "when
/use a word, it means just what I choose it to mean, neither
more nor less ". "Glory," for that scornful potentate meant,
it will be remembered, "a nice knock-down argument".
Without entering into the merits of the question of termin-
ology, let us refer to these intellectual ideas as being general
rather than universal. This generality, then, is a striking and
inevitable feature of all intellectual operations.
Let us take just one instance, so that our thought may not
be suspended in mid-air. I look at what I believe to be an
oak-table. I find in consciousness a whole crowd of visual
images of the varying shades, corresponding to the different
"grain " of the wood, and the play of light, and in addition
a number of shapes which together give the object its "table"
form. Over and above the imagery I find the " consciousnesses
of meaning" or concepts, expressible in such terms as "table,"
"oak," "wood," and the rest. Such thoughts are no less
clear than the imagery: indeed they are more significant and
certainly more insistent, as without them the images would be
nothing more than a group of meaningless data, encumbering
consciousness. But the state of mind which is expressed in
the term "table "—probably the word itself is not present—is
equally applicable to every table of whatsoever kind that ever
was or can be. The thought, as such, contains no trace, no
hint of particularity or singleness of application.
Similarly the other thoughts, expressed as "wood " or " oak,"
are applicable either to all kinds of solid material that can be
obtained from trees, or to all the wood that can be obtained
from the oak-trees that are scattered across the face of the
earth. The absence of limit in range of application, in a word,
the generality of the terms is apparent.
The contrast, therefore, between sensible and intellectual
knowledge leaves nothing to be desired in the way of complete-
ii


162 REALITY AND TRUTH
ness or precision. We might add a multitude of interesting
details to show how all abstract terms, like nationality, blueness,
irrelevance, and, indeed, our whole stock-in-trade of epithets,
adverbs, and of verb-forms, are all equally general; but we
should be wandering rather far into the domains of grammar
and logic. Suffice it to say that language being the work of
intellect, bears its characteristic stamp of generality.
One direct result of this widespread generality may be
noted in passing. We human beings cannot possibly by a
purely intellectual act grasp, or indeed conceive, the particular
or the individual. We can, of course, represent a particular
to ourselves in consciousness, by holding together a certain
number of intellectual ideas, and a certain group of sensible
images, as we found on thinking "Edward VII". But in-
dividuality as such is unknown to our intellects. We may
add one general term to another, king, diplomat, sportsman,
sovereign of England, thus tightening the ring and hoping,
if possible, to limit the applicability of the whole group of
general terms to one single individual. But we must fail in
the long run. By piling up terms of general range, we can
never hope to "comer" individuality. Without doubt, we
experience the individual, but when we turn to express what
we "know," we add epithet to epithet, phrase to phrase, and
produce, not the individual, but a type.
We naturally express ideas, or just that part of our experi-
ence which is made up of intellectual acts, while our sensible
experience, in all its vividness, its wealth of detail, its insistent
particularity must remain forever incommunicable. Thus
language, while it may suggest much, may never explicitly
reveal the fulness of our human experience. We know more
than we can express.
The Relative Stability of Intellectual Acts.
To this first clashing difference between sensible and in-
tellectual knowledge, we may add one other before passing
to our summary. Concepts, by which, of course, we mean


OUR GRASP OF REALITY 163
intellectual states of consciousness, enjoy a certain degree of
constancy and stability amid the flux of the other psychological
events. "Brother" has the same meaning for me now as it
had many years ago. So, too, the meanings of "nationality,"
"force," or let us say "militarism," do not vary though my
judgments of their utility or value, for individuals or govern-
ments may be easily changed by the pressure of new facts.
New experiences, new associations, even a total change in our
"judgment of value" may thus be effected, without tamper-
ing in the least with the unchanging "meaning" or concept.
Now, this relative degree of fixity distinguishes my concepts
sharply from my sensible knowledge. It needs little observa-
tion to convince ourselves that we rarely see an object, or
hear, shall we say, a sonata of Beethoven in the same way. I
myself am in a different mood, or my nervous energy, and with
it the sharpness and fullness of my perceptions, may have
changed appreciably. Again, the object itself may have varied
in one or more of a hundred ways between the two observa-
tions, as, let us say, our complexion and general appearance
varies at different hours of the day. Even if the object be as
fixed as a marble statue, of which we sometimes think as a
symbol of immutability, then the light, the environment, the
general arrangement of things or the circumstances may have
altered sufficiently to yield us a new, distinct impression. But
why labour an obvious point? It were a platitude among
people of refined and sharpened perception to say that sensa-
tions are as changeful as the needle of a compass carried by
an unsteady hand.
And as sensations fluctuate within wide limits, the imagery,
which they leave behind in consciousness, to be recalled by
the law of association, is still more fleeting and inconstant.
Scarcely ever the same for two consecutive fractions of a
second, this vast fund of imagery, the record of past experi-
ence, is almost the despair of the psychologist. Like the film
of a cinematograph, each simple picture on closer scrutiny is
seen to differ from its immediate neighbours.


164 REALITY AND TRUTH
Once again, the difference between the two kinds of know-
ledge is sufficiently characteristic. Concepts, by their nature,
enjoy a certain constancy and fixity, which is denied to the
imagery and impressions that are gained sensorially. On that
account, no doubt, communication between man and man is
made in terms of intellect and not of sense. Language, that
is, is made up of general terms, which on account of their
constancy of meaning and relative fixity, lend themselves to
the difficult task of communicating ideas. Sensible experience,
by reason of its abundant detail and overwhelming incon-
stancy and diversity, remains inarticulate. Indeed, it remains
the personal inalienable property of each individual.
The Diversity in Application of Sensations and
Concepts.
So far, then, we have shown that we possess two distinct
kinds of knowledge, two irreducible psychological processes,
which are characterized by deep-seated and abiding differences.
So much for our psychological equipment. The two pro-
cesses exist. How, then, are they applied to the real world
about which they purport to give us specific information? We
have already proved that we stand facing a real world; that
we lie, as it were, enmeshed in a scheme of things. These
sensorial and intellectual elements of our psychological equip-
ment purport to inform us about that scheme of things. Is
there any difference in their respective claims, in the way
in which they "grasp" things, or what they grasp? For the
moment, we only seek to know what precisely is the nature of
their claim: its validity will be tested later. Let us, as usual,
take one or two instances.
I stand gazing at what is ordinarily called a diamond. The
thought " diamond," let us say, is in my mind, side by side with
the sense-impressions of brilliance, "rose-shape,'' translucency,
and that so-called "spirit " which no jewel of distinction can
lack. If I am asked by a friend "What is that?" I reply
unhesitatingly " A diamond ". If I am further asked, "Why


OUR GRASP OF REALITY 165
are you looking so intently?" I might reply, "Oh, it has
such marvellous brilliance, such a beautifully-cut rose-shape:
it is not 'dead,' but has real spirit". My words betray an
extraordinary difference in the application of my concept, and
of my sense-impressions. The object is said to be what I
conceive it, and to have or to possess the qualities made known
to me by sensible impressions.
Similarly, in answer to the question "Who is that?" I
may answer, if I do not recall the name, "Oh! that is a man
whom I knew, etc. . . . who has the strangest coloured hair,
the keenest eye, and the worst taste of anyone I know ". Once
again he is what my concept represents—a man—and he has
what my sense-impressions have registered. Instances might
easily be multiplied. That which is an elephant is said to have
a vexatiously good memory, a swallow to have a strange homing
instinct, a dahlia to have an unpleasant scent, sodium to have
a bright metallic lustre.
Naturally, the same stress is not always laid upon these
remarkable differences which lie embedded deeply in the
structure of our language. The fact remains that they are
very real, and that they imply a whole philosophy.
By intellectual processes, expressible in general terms such
as king, man, student, statue, lamp, and the like, I purport to
grasp the essence, the nature, or the being of the several
objects. I profess, by these means, to be able to answer the
question as to what they are, in a word, to know their in-
timate nature. By my sense-perceptions, on the other hand,
I seem to grasp not the nature, but simply the principal
qualities or properties of the objects that engage my attention.
Thus visually I grasp, or think I grasp, the qualities of colour,
brightness, shape, extension, depth: by my auditive impres-
sions, the qualitative timbre, pitch, and volume of the notes
they are capable of making: by my sense of touch, I gather
whether the object is rough or smooth, rigid or plastic, and
gain some appreciation of its magnitude: and so on for the
other sense-impressions. They all purport to give me informa-


166 REALITY AND TRUTH
tion not directly about the nature of the given object, but
about its characteristic marks, properties, or what we in meta-
physic style its "determinations ".
Now as we possess both the intellectual and sensible ele-
ments of knowledge at one and the same time, we may com-
bine the two claims, and see that we purport at least to have
more or less explicit information as to the nature of things,
and'of their chief characteristics. The claim is extraordinary
enough, and must be scrutinized carefully in the sequel. For
the moment it will be clear that the claim itself is found im-
plicitly in our use of language which shows how differently we
conceive the range and applicability of two diverse orders of
knowledge.
We began this chapter with the question, " How do we grasp
reality?" Our answer is now ready. We are in possession
of two distinct kinds of knowledge, belonging to the irreducible
conscious elements of intellect and sense. One, the in-
tellectual, behaves, at least, as if it grasps the specific nature
of reality: the other, the sensorial, gives us a whole fund of
highly particularized information about the characteristics of
that same reality. By combining the two, we claim to have a
not inconsiderable stock of knowledge. The claim of course
is interesting. Need we say, it is offered neither as presumption
nor proof. In the next chapter we are prepared to consider
arguments in favour of the real meaning and validity of the
claim. At the moment we have done no more than bring
the question of human knowledge to a point. Having thus
sharpened and "set " the question, we may now turn to what
has been called the anguishing problem of values—the validity
of knowledge.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE.
In every science we find one or two fundamental facts or laws
to which all the other facts are tributary, and around which
all the leading conceptions pivot. The rest is a matter of
inference, extension, or application. Now the theory of know-
ledge is no exception to the rule. The questions in this
discipline may be multiplied in the most bewildering manner
by anyone who has a genius for seeing difficulties; but all
on closer scrutiny are seen to be nothing more than aspects
of the five great problems with which we started our inquiry.
Of the five, there are two which far transcend the others in
power and importance. They alone have the power of sus-
pending our inquiry, and, in the absence of a satisfying solution,
of ruining our hopes. They are the real Gordian knots. One
of them was "untied" when we established the existence
"outside us " of a world of things which play upon us, in some
strange way eliciting the phenomena of sensation and thought.
To the second we must now address ourselves. It may be
put very simply in the form of a question. Is there, then,
any reason whatever for believing that these sensations and
thoughts give us reliable information about this "independ-
ent" world of persons and things? And if so, what is the
reason?
We have seen, as the result of a purely psychological study,
that the ordinary thought or concept which may be expressed
in a general term claims to determine for us the specific
nature of its object; while in sense-perception we seem to
be given the marks or properties by which presumably that
167


168 REALITY AND TRUTH
same nature is manifested. Now we turn and ask, challeng-
ingly enough: Is the claim valid? Is the information reliable?
And if so, why? On the nature of our answer depends the
whole success of the theory of knowledge. The fate of all
our knowledge of whatsoever kind, in fact, hangs in the
balance. Could any question be more vital or more enthrall-
ing? And, incidentally, could any question be more intricate?
To begin with, we must relinquish any vague hope of being
able to scrutinize the nature of " things as they are " in them-
selves and for themselves. Things exist. So much at least
is certain. They give rise in us, moreover, to cognitive phen- ,
omena, which are capable of setting the whole gamut of our
conscious states in motion. Beyond these phenomena, of
sensation and thought, whether they be reliable or not, or
what comes to the same, beyond the presentational order we
may never pass. Without hinting obliquely at any Kantian
limitation of knowledge it is clear that we may never know
more of things than we find within our consciousness. Any
theory therefore, which seems to suggest that we can escape from
our own consciousness at a critical moment, in order to con-
template "the thing in itself" or that we have some strange
power of getting behind or beyond our ordinary means
of knowledge must be dismissed, however regretfully, as an
ultra-realist's dream.
All that we can ever know is given in sensorial and in-
tellectual processes. To appeal therefore to anything "be-
yond," above all to appeal to the very nature "in and for
itself" of the thing, which these processes alone can reveal to
us, in order to test their truth or accuracy, is intrinsically im-
possible. One feels inclined to quote that wise saying of
Tweedledee: "If it was so, it might be: if it were so, it
would be: but as it isn't, it ain't. That's logic."
Just as we found, however, on examining our consciousness
that we were forced to infer the existence of an extra-mental
real world—to see, as it were, that our sensations had a jagged
edge where they had been torn away from reality—so now


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 169
perhaps by examining these conscious phenomena once again,
we may be able to discuss the conditions of their validity,
of their reliable application to the world that lies outside the
sphere of consciousness.
The Meaning of Validity.
What, then, do we mean by the validity of knowledge? I
stand before what is usually known as a bar of gold. My
consciousness yields me various visual impressions of the
characteristic rich colour of gold, of a certain lustre, a parti-
cular shape, extension, and the rest, and in addition the
intellectual thought or concept "gold ". That concept defines
the nature of the particular object. On being "unpacked,"
the concept refers to a being or thing which possesses the
qualities of colour and lustre that are given in the concomitant
sense-impressions, and which, in addition, does not tarnish nor
yield to the action of ordinary acids. Possibly the concept
may include the fact that gold is more than usually scarce
and valuable, and that it can be hammered out to the thinness
of a leaf.
Now when we ask if this information is valid, what do we
mean? Obviously a sensation of itself can neither be valid
nor invalid, neither true nor false; nor for that matter can a
concept be true. I think "gold," and I have a visual sensa-
tion of its distinctive colour. I find them in my conscious-
ness: they are "given " as immediate data: they are ultimate
facts. Nothing in the world can make them either true or
false. Naturally if I proceed to formulate judgments, that is,
to manipulate my concepts and sensations, to say "this is
gold" or "this object has a golden colour," then indeed the
judgments may be either true or false. But the concepts and
sensations of themselves are and can be neither true nor un-
true any more, let us say, than are conjunctions or prepositions.
In and for themselves they are simple facts. It is only the
application of the simple facts to the objects of our experience
which may be inaccurate or perverse.


170 REALITY AND TRUTH
If, for instance, in presence of a crystal, I thought "dia-
mond," or on hearing an aeroplane thought " motor car," what
of it? The thoughts and conscious events, neither true nor
untrue, until we think of relating or applying them to the
external phenomena, or objects. Habitually, however, we make
these applications, speedily enough, by the formation of simple
judgments. What, we ask at present, then, is this. Does the
concept "gold," in any sense " reflect" the nature of the object
styled gold, and do our characteristic sensations yield valid
information as to its properties?
Before giving our answer with its accompanying reasons, we
must first of all prove our own question.
What We Mean by Colour?
When we say, for instance, that the bar of metal has a
golden colour, thus establishing a relation or making a judg-
ment, what do we mean? Obviously, unless we are children ,
or the very plainest of naif realists, we do not mean to suggest;
for a moment that the colour, gold, lies embedded in the bar,
nor that the metal "contains" the colour, as water may be
thought to contain a spoonful of salt in solution. Further, we
cannot mean that the colour lies as a sort of veil over the sur-
face of the metal, nor—this last denial is more important—
that the colour is "there," "all the time," even in the absence
of light or of any perceiving eye.
What, then, do we mean precisely by our statement? When
all that is impossible has been eliminated from our thought,
we can only mean that the metal is of such a nature that when
played upon by ordinary " white light," it yields me the char-
acteristic colour-impression which we style "gold ". Granted,
that is, (i) the presence of the metal, (2) at least a pencil of
light, and (3) an agent capable of visual perception, the im-
pression "gold " will be recorded.
There is a " something," a quality of some description belong-
ing to the metal, which, to the human eye in suitable condi-
tions of light, gives this striking colour-effect. What that


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 171
"something," that quality of the metal may be "in itself," I
do not know, and, in consequence, I make no assertion
about its intimate nature. Whatever it be, this "je ne sais
quoi," it is translated for me in terms of colour.
If I am told by the physical scientist that the colour is due
to the vibratory motion of ether, or, let us say, that colour
may be explained by the electronic structure of matter; if, in
fact, any explanation of the phenomenon of colour is given in
terms of ether, light, or electricity, I, though deeply interested,
am left profoundly unmoved in my original conviction. All
that I meant and mean in asserting "gold" of the bar, is that
there is some aspect of the metal which I apprehend under the
modality of golden colour. The scientific explanation may
extend my knowledge very considerably; but it cannot change,
or rectify, however slightly, my first restrained assertion.
In order to make our thought even algebraically clear, we
may state our case in symbols.
Let us call the property of the bar C. Now when we say
that the bar is golden, we mean that a given quality C exists
which is capable of giving me the colour-impression of gold.
This my colour-impression we call C. I "know" C: I ignore
the nature of C. Any statement whatever as to the nature
of C, which we can only know in its results may therefore lead
us into error. When the plain man thinks that the colour ex-
ists "in" the object, he identifies C" with C; he professes to
describe the nature of C, and with the best intentions says
what is untrue. So, too, when the physical scientist speaks of
ether, light-waves, undulatory movement, electronic structure
and the rest, he is on the track of the nature of C", and may
conceivably be wrong. But when I, as an epistemologist, make
the statement "this bar has colour," I only mean that there
exists a quality C, giving rise to my impression C.
My position, moreover, is impregnable. My restrained as-'
sertion only means that there exists an external stimulus which
produces C in me. By the careful consideration of our own
conscious states, we were forced, as we discovered in the fore-


17a REALITY AND TRUTH
going chapters, to conclude the existence of an external stimulus
for sensation. C is a typical sensation: its external stimulus I
style C. Thus my statement that the bar has colour, is merely
a reassertion of the principles which drove me to posit an
external world. In a shortened form it is nothing more than
a restatement of the old indubitable principle of causality. No
changing conscious state, it will be remembered, can be to
itself the full cause of its own transformation. C is the ex-
trinsic agent or stimulus which produces C.
And the same argument might be applied to each of my
sense-impressions concerning the bar of gold, including the
metallic "ring," the musical note, which gold on being struck
is capable of emitting. I only mean that the gold has a parti-
cular quality—what that quality is, who shall say?—which,
in certain circumstances, is grasped by me under the modality
of sound. Doubtless, once again, it is all a question of vibra-
tion, and the undulatory movement of ether, which, playing
upon my rather complicated organ of hearing, produces the
"ring ". of gold in my consciousness. All this may be true;
but it must be noted that my immediate assertion is far
more restrained. It makes no pretence to understand the
"arcana" of things, the "hidden" nature of the stimulus.
It only reaffirms succinctly enough the fundamental principle
of causality.
What do We Mean by Extension?
Of all my sense-impressions stimulated by the bar of gold
or-,by any physical object, that of extension, which may be
apprehended both by vision and touch, is one of the most
important. Descartes, it will be remembered, found extension
so inilienable from his thought of material things, as to regard
it as the very essence of matter. Locke, following in the
Cartesian tradition, singled out extension as a "real," "prim-
ary" quality. Extension, then, as a few moments' reflection
will assure us, is an impression of singular importance.
Now when we say, as the result of visual and tactile sensa-


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 173
tions, that a thing like our bar of gold is extended, what do
we mean? That it occupies space? No! certainly that cannot
be our meaning unless we wish to find ourselves describing
space in terms of extension, and extension in terms of space.
The "occupation of space " is an easy phrase which, while being -
susceptible of a real philosophic meaning, should be avoided
as an explanation of anything; above all, as an explanation of
extended matter.
Space is nothing more than a real aspect of conglomerate
matter. We think of matter as continuous—there are no un-
filled "gaps" anywhere though the line may be very thinly
held—and as extended. Now if we concentrate our thought
on the extension of this vast continuous whole, and prescind
altogether from the material stuff', whether it be solid, liquid
gas, or ether that is extended, we arrive at our concept of
space. As space, therefore, is nothing more than our concept
of the extension of the whole material universe, it is impossible
to explain extension in terms of space, or what comes to the
same, in terms of itself.
When we say, then, that a body is extended, what do we
mean? Simply that it is divisible into parts. It may be
actually undivided. That matters little. If it is extended,
we think at least that it is divisible, if not by mechanical,
physical, or chemical means, at least in thought. The divisi-
bility, moreover, can be verified as a rule by the actual work of
division. Now this quality of divisibility, which I think of as
actually belonging to things, is translated for me in one of
two ways; visually under the form of dimensions, for every
real thing (unlike the merely conceptual entities or dream-
things of the geometers) that I perceive or imagine must always
have two or three dimensions: tactually under the form of re-
sistance to muscular effort, however slight.
When, therefore, I say that a thing is extended, I mean
simply to assert that I have sense-impressions of vision and
• touch, which argue divisibility. Even in the case of an in-
visible gas, which is "unseen" and "unfelt," I argue by


174 REALITY AND TRUTH
analogy from the fact of its material existence that it is divis-
ible. Its extension implies divisibility.
Once again I am only reasserting the principle of causality
in a practical fashion. The sense-impressions, whether they be
of dimensions or of resistance to pressure, must, as we dis-
covered, be explained by some stimulus or agent outside con-
sciousness. Moreover, as is obvious, the stimulus must be that
aspect of the real object which renders it capable of division.
"Capable of division" and divisibility come to the same in
English. We may therefore rest assured that in applying our
concept of extension to things, we are only making an im-
mediate and legitimate inference from the observed facts of
dimension or resistance. We are only recording an applica-
tion of our undeniable principle of causality.
So far, then, we have considered only the sense-impressions
which purport to give us some account of the qualities of
things. If we guard ourselves against the crude realism of at-
tributing all that we find in consciousness immediately and
directly to the nature of the object, we find that the claim of
these sense-impressions is beyond cavil or question. It rests
entirely in the principle of causality, which we found after a
long inquiry to be unassailable. Now let us turn to the
concepts or general terms which claim to define the very nature
of the perceived object.
The Applicability of Thoughts to Reality.
In presence of the metallic bar I find in consciousness
the thought "gold". What, then, do we mean by "gold"?
Only that "gold " is matter of a special metallic kind, which is
distinguished by certain well-defined characteristics. It has a
special brightness and lustre, is malleable, enjoys immunity from
the action of ordinary acids and so on. Briefly, "gold" is
matter which gives rise-to certain sense-impressions, and which
in addition is capable, in the proper circumstances, of produc-
ing in the observer a given set of experiences.
What, then, do we mean by "matter," on which we lean so


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 175
(heavily in our conception of "gold"? Though the concept
oTH-matter " has been obscured in a hundred ways, we would
maintain that it is in reality simple. By matter we mean an
unknown something which exists, which is extended, and which
may have a multitude of variant qualities inhering in it.
While thus serving as a natural subject of inherence for other
entities, styled properties or qualities or what not, matter itself
requires nothing further in which to inhere. It is of its nature
to be self-supporting, while it supports and apparently produces
these manifestations which are registered in consciousness as
colour, form, extension, sound, and the rest. Directly of
matter as such, of its nature, that is, apart from its manifesta-
tions, I pretend to have no cognizance whatever. I know
something of its manifestations, of its typical reactions, of its
general behaviour.
While, therefore, I have no direct and immediate knowledge
of what matter is, I have a vast amount of information, regis-
tered in sensible experience, of what it does. However much
I may love the adage "hoc solum scio quod nihil scio," I
must concede that I possess the indirect, though valuable
knowledge that matter is the something—otherwise unknown—
which presents these manifestations and which behaves in this
or that well-known way. Thus the nature of things is shown,
however indirectly, in their manifestations: we know what
things are, by what they do. The tree is known by its fruits;
the character of a man by his actions; the species of a plant
by its blossom and leaves; and the nature of matter by its
properties of extension, attraction, and the rest.
Deep down it is a simple thought. By matter we mean just
precisely the reality of the extra-mental world, the existence of
which we were driven to concede by the plain facts of the
case, and which we learn to know by the phenomena of sensa-
tion. By "gold," in defining which we were led to consider
matter, we mean that reality which in addition to the generic
properties of all matter enjoys a certain group of special char-
acteristics.


176 REALITY AND TRUTH
Now in ascribing my concept "gold" to the metallic bar,
am I justified?
Let us note in passing that in applying "gold" to the bar,
I have in a condensed way applied my past experience to
define a new event, and thus integrated the new with the old.
In the past I have come in contact with a particular object
which by convention is styled gold, and concerning which, it
may be, I have read much in books on economics and chem-
istry. The result is a definite "consciousness of meaning"
for the term gold. All that, however, is past. Now I come
in presence of a new object, and following upon a fixed psy-
chological law, I grasp the present experience in terms of the
past. I say, this metallic bar is gold.
Can the application be false? A moment's reflection is
enough to assure us that the whole process of application may
be vitiated in one of two typical ways. Either (i) my con-
cept "gold" may be seriously distorted through ignorance,
and thus out of harmony with the standardized conventions
of chemists, or (2) my concept "gold" may be perfectly exact,
but it may be applied wrongly to some base metal that has
been "tricked out" to look like gold. Thus, either my
concept or its application may be false. Obviously the ques-
tion of concepts, which purport to define the nature of things,
is not so simple as that of the sensorial phenomena.
To solve the difficulty, we can only trust once again to the
plain facts. They must carry our vessel, whithersoever they
will. Our only duty is to hold the sail so that it may catch
the wind, and to hope, as we speed ahead, that we may find
some hospitable shore.
Let us then consider each of two unpleasant possibilities of
error which occur all too frequently in ordinary life.
The First Source of Error—the Concept Itself.
First, let us suppose the concept itself of gold is erroneous.
Let it be inadequate, inaccurate, or wholly false. How is it to
be tested or corrected? We shall see in a moment that the


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 177
test is experience. I may, for instance, imagine that gold is
not an element, but an amalgam like brass and bronze of two
other metals; or I may have a theory that gold is only one of
the other metals "transmuted ". Possibly I may think that it
can be dissolved in strong sulphuric acid, or that it yields to
the "action of the air" like silver which dons a coat of black
on exposure. All this information is spurious, as those who
are conversant with the study of metals know well.
Gold is not an amalgam: it is an element. Nor is there any
evidence to show that it can be obtained by the transmutation
of any other metal. It will not dissolve in the strongest sul-
phuric acid, nor does it tarnish on exposure to the air. All
these statements can be checked one by one by experiment,
which is only a highly organized form of sensible experience.
Thus my concept may as an intellectual representation be
vitiated through and through, out of touch with the phenomena
of experience.
And if this is true for "gold," what can be said of other con-
cepts? What inaccuracies might be discovered, could we only
probe our minds, in concepts like radium, electricity, mastodon,
empire, confederacy, state, religion, love, force, indeed in all
those concepts that are not thrust upon us frequently in ordin-
ary life! In such thoughts,
What flaws may lurk,
What strain o' the stuff, what warpings past the aim.
The Second Source of Error—the Faulty Application.
Secondly, my application of a "proper" concept may be at
fault. I may think that brass coated with gold-leaf is gold, or
I may make the same mistake in handling some of the beauti-
ful Indian amalgams. Here again, we are in presence of
almost illimitable possibilities of error. I may take a crystal
for a diamond, a blue bead for a turquoise, a painted plaster
statue for one of bronze, a wax-work figure for a living person,
a "drip-drip" of water for a footfall, an inferior sparkling
wine for champagne, an artificial scent for the perfume of
S


178 REALITY AND TRUTH
violets. Often enough we detect our mistake, and correct
the faulty application. At the same time we are left musing,
wondering how often these counterfeit judgments, dealing not
with turquoises and diamonds but with things of importance,
may, all undetected, pass into currency as coin of the realm.
It is a sombre thought, and as we realize its awful possibilities
we feel, for a moment, as if we were adrift on the high seas
without chart or compass, in the darkness of a night, unbroken
by starlight or flame.
Yet, strangely enough, in the very act of tracking these two
great sources of error, we have, after all, found the sources
which must be choked. As so often happens, by looking our
difficulty straight in the face, we have found its solution.
The Remedy Against the Two Errors.
First of all my concept, let us say of " gold," may be errone-
ous. What, to be brief, are the facts of the case? There is
an existent something, which always gives rise to the same
sensible experience, and which always behaves in the same
way, reacting or not reacting to the same stimuli with unfail-
ing regularity. In our language, by long-standing convention,
this something is called "gold". If my concept, then, is
faulty, I am out of touch with our English-speaking conven-
tion, and what is far worse, out of harmony with sensible
experience.
If I think that gold is soluble in sulphuric acid, I can at
least make the attempt and . . . record my failure. And so
for all other possible deviations from the standardized concept
"gold ". Each deviation may be checked by suitable experi-
ment, or by more casual perception. Once checked, the error
may be eliminated, and my concept "gold" may be made
to flush with the facts. Indeed the tracking of error is a
luminously simple if somewhat laborious process. Gold, or
for that matter any general term like tree, flower, man, animal,
student, king, purports to define a nature. Any one of the
terms represents, intellectually, a being or nature which gives


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 179
rise to this or that group of marks or manifestations. As the
manifestations are registered in sensible experience, by eye
or ear or taste or some other typical sensation, we may test
the accuracy of our intellectual concept by our sense-percep-
tions.
By organizing or integrating our experience, we can thus test
the validity of the concept, as the intellectual representative of
any particular nature or being. If, for instance, I think that
Rhine wines have the aromatic flavour of the Mosel variety,
my concept of Rhine wine is at fault. To discover the error,
I have only to sample the many "Hocks "—it is well not to
be too precipitate in the cause of scientific accuracy !—which
will be found to yield no such " bouquet". Result: possibly
a bad head, but that is a mere physiological concomitant.
Epistemologically, the result is a rectification of the first
concept. In short, there is no imaginable error in any concept
—clearly we speak of a concept taken as an intellectual re-
presentation—which cannot be eliminated or rectified by a patient
collection 0/sense-data.
The second great source of inaccuracy or falsehood, lay, it
will be remembered, in the application of a " proper," "just"
concept to something which it did not represent. Thus, if I
say that this silver-gilt cup is "gold," I fall into this fallacy.
Yet once again the error can be excluded by a careful use of
sensorial observation. I say that the metal of the cup is gold.
So far all is crisp and definite. What do I mean by "gold"?
Simply a metal which, to revert to our former algebraical
setting, enjoys the properties FQ'R'S'. These properties
P'Q'R'S' are translated in my consciousness under the
sensible experiences which I style P, Q, R, S. Where in pre-
sence of a metal I find P, Q, R, S, in my consciousness, I infer
P'Q'R'S' by the old law of causality, and then immediately
think "gold ".
Moreover, by taking sufficient care, I can assure myself
that all the characteristic properties of the metal are included
in the group P'Q'R'S', and that nothing, which does not
12*


180 REALITY AND TRUTH
appertain to gold, has strayed into the list. Nothing could
be more simple. Now I say that the metal of the silver-gilt
cup is "gold ". If challenged, I can put my judgment to the
test, and see, as a dealer in precious metals does habitually,
if it is capable of giving me the sense-data P, Q, R, S. If it
does, then the cup is made of gold. If one of the reactions
breaks down; if, for instance, it begins to dissolve or tarnish
under the action of an ordinary acid—then I know that the
cup is not gold. In either case, I can be certain of my judg-
ment, just as certain, we may suggest, as of the principle of
causality which on careful analysis turned out to be indubit-
able and undeniable. Every trace of error can thus, by dint
of a little care, be successfully eliminated, leaving no trace of
uncertainty in my judgment.
Our summary, with regard to concepts, is hopefuL Of
themselves, considered just as conscious processes, they can
be neither valid nor invalid. Taken as representatives of
given objects, they may be even wildly wrong. Further,
when applied to objects with which they have no natural
connection, the resultant judgment may be false. In either
case the error can be eliminated. Concepts, in other words,
may, if we take sufficient care, be enabled to support their
claim: they may, and not infrequently do, actually define the'
nature of things.
Symbolic Summary of Our Findings.
Indeed, our findings in this chapter may be all expressed in
the crisp algebraical way. In presence of a particular object,
we find our consciousness "filled" with the sense-impressions
P, Q, R, S, T, of colour, size, shape, lustre, and what not. At
the same time we have a concept of the nature of the object.
The concept defines the object as a being, no more, and no
less, which gives rise in us to P, Q, R, S, T, and which, in
addition, perhaps, is capable in suitable circumstances of
stimulating U, V, W, in consciousness. Our intellect, that is,
grasps being — who was it who said that intellect was the


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 181
"gaoler of being"?—as "that which" gives rise in me to
P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W.
To say that the object itself enjoys the properties P, Q, R,
eta, would be a gratuitous and even naif assertion. All that
we can legitimately infer is that P, Q, R, eta, in us spring
from qualities in the thing, which we style P'Q'R', etc. The
thing itself, whatever it be, is a being which possesses the pro-
perties P'Q'R', etc. P' is the quality which is translated for
me as P; Q', the quality, whatever it be, which is translated
for me as Q, and so on. Briefly, we think of the object as a
something—a being, or essence or nature—which owing to
properties P'Q'R'S', eta, is capable of stimulating the im-
pressions P, Q, R, S, etc., in my consciousness. We think of
things, in other words, as the indubitable principle of causal-
ity shows that we must.
In spite, therefore, of many clinging difficulties, we can see
plainly that the simple data of sense-impressions and concepts
may be used to define and describe the nature of things.
Though the nature of these extra-mental realities, as they are
"in and for themselves" must remain forever unknown, we
yet possess a vast amount of accurate information as to what
they do, and hence, an equal amount of indirect knowledge of
what they are. Let us, now, turn to consider a few of the
difficulties which were given so formidable an expression in
our first chapter.
The Colour Difficulty.
I. And first, let us take up the old difficulty about colour.
The same object will surely give rise to different colour-im-
pressions in varying lights or at different moments, changing
it may be from crimson to mauve. "Which is it," cries the
critic, "which is it, crimson or mauve?"
"Which is it?" we reply, "Why! in one sense both; in
another sense neither". If the critic means which is the
colour in consciousness, we can only say, following the plain
facts, that it is both crimson and mauve. If he means, which


182 REALITY AND TRUTH
is the colour of the object, may we remind him that colour
does not and cannot exist in objects? Colour, it will be re-
membered, is the quality C in consciousness, which argues the
existence of a quality—otherwise unknown—called C in the ob-
ject. To identify C and C is the age-long error of plain realists.
The simple truth is far more obvious. A given object has
a quality C, which in different circumstances is capable of
being translated for me, either as crimson or mauve.
"Excellent," interjects the critic, "then, as everything can
be made to run through a whole rainbow of colours, you will,
of course, give up the inveterate realist habit of referring to
the • characteristre^colour' of anything. If a thing can be
'translated' as either crimson or mauve, why single out
either colour to the exclusion of the other?"
The difficulty, we would reply, arises from neglecting half
the relevant facts. A given object will appear, let us say,
crimson by daylight, and mauve by the light of an electric
lamp. The only proper description of our colour-impressions
is to say, by inserting all the relevant conditions, that the object
is crimson by day, and mauve by electric light of a certain
candle-power. For the sake of brevity, we standardize the
ordinary white-light of day, or that particular light in which
the given object is most commonly seen. It is no more than
a practical convention to secure the maximum of uniformity.
Thus, when we speak of a " scarlet " geranium, we refer to our
colour-vision in the sunlight.
Colour, then, is a function of four variables—or, to use
less technical language, colour depends upon four elements
or factors, each of which may change. The plain realist con-
centrating on one variable, the quality in the object, forgets
the other three. The first variable is the quality C in the ob-
ject, and the other three are the light in which the object is
seen, the medium (air or glass, or water) which separates me
from the object, and lastly, my own sensory process including
eye, nerve, and brain-lobes, which, taken together, form the
physiological instrument of vision.


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 183
Obviously, a change in any one of these four variables may
induce a change in my colour-impression. If the quality C
proved unsteady, the whole colour-cycle of possible impres-
sions, would, in all probability, vary. If the light alone changes,
while all the other variables remain constant, we may receive
the most widely divergent colour-impressions: witness the
difference in colour by day and by lamplight. Or again, if the
medium alone of all the four variables changes, my vision of
colour may be strangely different. When the medium is air, a
coloured object may give the impression of crimson: when the
medium is glass and air, the impression may be no longer
crimson but brick-red or orange. Lastly, a change in the
physiological instrument may bring about any change from
dimness of colour to partial colour-blindness, or to total in-
ability to perceive any colour.
Now, as a matter of fact, most of our differences in colour-
vision can be explained fully by changes in the light, the
medium, or the eye. It is well, therefore, to eliminate all these
possibilities before turning to accuse the object of having
changed its quality C. If, however, after judicious elimina-
tion of all other possible sources of change, we are still face
to face with a colour difference, we must, as we actually do in
the case of autumn leaves, assume that C itself has changed.
In any case, the actual, undoubted differences in colour-vision,
whether due to the nature of the light, the medium, the per-
ceiving organ, or to some change in the object itself, can all
be explained satisfactorily. There is nothing in the fact of
colour, therefore, to imperil the validity of our considered
judgments. Those judgments, if sufficiently restrained, follow
immediately from the first epistemological application of the
principle of causality.
The Shape Difficulty.
II. From the consideration of colour, we pass to the shape of
things. The old dictum of the sceptics will serve as an excel-
lent example. "All that we have power to see is the straight


184 REALITY AND TRUTH
rod bent in the pool." What, then, are the facts? I have a
rod which gives me the impression of straightness. I plunge it
partly in water, and at the point of incidence, where the air and
water meet, the rod looks bent. Which is it, bent or straight?
Let us follow our hopeful method in treating colour. The
shape of things is a function of at least four variables; of our
visual apparatus; of the medium in and through which the
object is seen; of the position of the percipient which gives
the angle of vision: and lastly, of some actual quality in the
object. A change in any one of these eminently variable
factors will induce a change in my impression of shape. We
may give a brief instance of each variation.
I, who am used to viewing things with two eyes; that is, to
binocular vision, close one eye and look at a distant object.
When looked at with two eyes, the parts seem to project in
varying degrees of relief. When looked at with one eye, the
object appears "flattened," wanting in relief, in two rather
than three dimensions. Thus a slight change in my visual
apparatus has led to a considerable modification of my shape-
impression. For a change of medium, perhaps, our bent rod
is the best instance. If the medium be changed from air
alone to air and water, a rod, formerly straight, seems bent
An instance of the wonderful changes that can be wrought in'
our shape-impressions of any object by a change in the angle
of vision was given in our first chapter. We have only to walk
round a table to see how a change in position and consequent
angle of vision will give rise to startling variations in the lines
and angles of my table's surface. Lastly, there is some quality
inhering in things which is translated for me under the im-
pression of shape, whether it be yielded by sight or touch. If
that quality changes, that is, if the limits of its extension
change, as in the case of a growing leaf, the whole shape-
impression may differ.
We might indeed add another variable, to wit, the intensity
and colour of the light, differences in which can certainly induce
changes in the apparent form of things. We prefer, however,


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 185
to confine our attention to the four typical and more usual
variables which we have cited.
Now one result of extraordinary importance from the
epistemological "angle of vision" follows at once from these
observations. No record of the shape of anything can hope
to be accurate, unless all the conditions of observation are
stated in parentheses. We ought, strictly speaking, to state
the condition of our visual apparatus, the nature of the
intervening media, the point of observation which determines
the angles of vision, the intensity and colour of the light,
and, in addition, any other relevant variables.
But once again life is short, and we have no wish to give
this scientific precision to our impressions. We say that our
rod is straight, because we see it more frequently in one
medium: we standardize the normal conditions which yield at
least a measure of uniformity. If, however, for the sake of
accuracy, we mentioned the varying conditions in parentheses,
we should see at once that the "straight, bent rod" difficulty
was due to our ordinary "slip-shod" way of talking. The
rod, of course, gives rise in different circumstances to two
different impressions. The quality of the rod, the S' which
gives rise to my impression S, remain unchanged: only the
media have varied.
Before leaving the question of shape, we may as well revert
to the surface of the walnut desk which presented us with
such a host of difficulties in our first chapter. From a dozen
different points of view, it yields a dozen different shape-im-
pressions, and never, by any chance seems, what I actually
call it, oblong. Which of all these divergent impressions
gives the real shape of my table, and above all, why?
This is a type of all the questions which we repeated often
enough in our first chapter, when we were bent on loosening
our thoughts from their ultra-realist, dogmatic moorings. Now
that we have "set" the problem, the very question loses its
aspect of incisiveness, not to speak of its power of impaling
one on the horns of a dilemma.


186 REALITY AND TRUTH
"The real shape?" we query, "but the shape of things is
an impression found in consciousness, a function of four or
five variables. It would be nothing short of a miracle, there-
fore, if a change in any one of those variables, such, for in-
stance, as the angle of vision, did not result in a change of
impression. The one abiding quality of the table-top, which
we style S' may thus give rise to a whole bevy of different S's
or shape-impression in my consciousness."
In fact the whole difficulty vanishes, once we establish the
difference between S' and S, and see that the same S' ought
not to produce the same S, if the conditions of light medium
or angle of vision differ. Like the colour difficulty, the whole
problem of the "real" shape is only the outcome of our realist
prejudices.
"But why call the surface oblong," the reader may ask,
"when it never yields that impression?" The facts, we reply,
are simple. If we cut a piece of paper to flush with the two
sides at an angle-point, and if we find that the same piece of
paper exactly measures the remaining three angles, we say,
not unnaturally, that they are all equal. Each is just one-
fourth of the whole angle made by a line revolving about
itself, or as we say more easily a right angle. In addition, the
opposite sides of the table-surface on being measured prove
equal in length, and by convention we style such a figure an
oblong. As a matter of fact if one angle is right, and the
opposite sides are equal and parallel, the figure is an oblong.
Habitually, therefore, we glance down at one angle and
look at the sides. If the angle seems to be one of 900, and if
the opposite sides look parallel, we say, in spite of a hundred
divergent impressions, that the surface is oblong. We may
be right or wrong in our surmise. In any case this is
our actual reason for calling the surface oblong, though the
thing taken as a whole never looks oblong in all its parts, so
to say, at one and the same time. If our surmise be untrue,
the paper-test, or a lamina of wood cut to flush with the lines
at the angle points will reveal the inaccuracy. Thus the differ-


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 187
ences in our shape-impressions of one object present no in-
superable difficulties to the epistemologist who discusses our
knowledge in terms of the Principle of Causality. That principle
is, in very truth, a searchlight, which reveals not only the
existence of the great world that lies outside us, but also our
available knowledge of its nature.
The Difficulty of Illusions.
III. A third leading difficulty of a wholly different variety
seems to arise from the existence of optical illusions. At first
sight they look like some "thin-end-of-the-wedge" argument
against the validity of knowledge, or at least against the trust-
worthiness of our visual sensations, upon which we lean so
heavily in ordinary life. If we can sometimes be deceived, we
argue musingly, why not always? What is there in the nature
of things, in other words, to delimit the sphere of these visual
anomalies?
By way of answer, we had best choose a few examples.
Illusions, then, may be roughly classified under two main
headings. They either yield a "false impression" of some-
thing actually present, or else lead us to admit the presence
of something which has no real existence. Thus in the dis-
tance a small half-trampled bush may look like a goat, or a
portion of a fallen tree may in broad daylight look like a
peacock at rest; or again, lines which are really parallel may,
by a careful insertion of cross strokes, yield an impression of
convergence. These line illusions in all their bewildering
variety have been studied at great length by recent psycho-
logists, and if additional cases be required, all of us have
illusions frequently enough as to the nature of distant objects.
Which of us, for instance, has not construed a towel flung over
the arm of a chair into a crouching figure? So much for the
first type of illusion.
The second type is no less clear. In certain conditions of
twilight, or of dimness of vision, coming either from within
or without, we may be quite convinced that we are in presence


188 REALITY AND TRUTH
of a person, an animal, or thing of some kind, where there is
in reality nothing more than a curiously contrasted play of
light and darkness. Which of us has not started in the dusk
at a curious, unexpected ray of light, the shadow of which has
somehow been turned into a "man"?
Illusions, then, are frequent enough in ordinary life. We
must now ask if they tend to discount the value of our
visual perceptions.
If a distant tree-stump is thought to be a sleepy peacock,
obviously my judgment is hasty and false. The sense-im-
pression no doubt is vague in detail and outline. The error,
however, lies not in the visual image as such, but in the
judgment, in my rapid identification of the stimulating object
of my sense-impression with a peacock. My eye will not
"carry" with any degree of precision beyond a certain limited
distance, neither will my visual image be sharp in failing
light, nor in the presence of unfavourable environing circum-
stances.
Now, if my visual impression is to be not accurate—there
can be no question of the inaccuracy of these simple sense-
data—but sufficiently sharp and well-defined to form the basis
of a valid judgment, I must fulfil the conditions of clear vision.
These conditions, set out by the psychologists, involve a
maximum of distance, a minimum of light, the absence of
defect in the organ of vision, and in addition the absence of
disturbing phenomena by way of shadows, unsuitable back-
grounds and screens near the object. Granted the fulfilment
of these conditions, the vision will be clear, and the consecu-
tive judgment in all probability valid. As I approach, in other
words, I shall identify my "peacock" as a tree-stump.
In any case, whatever be the judgment, my visual sensation,
however ill-defined and "woolly," is beyond all reproach—
free from the slightest trace of error. The illusion, if such
there be, lies not in the sensation, but in the judgment which
I pass, forgetful of the indispensable conditions of valid know-
ledge. The same type of solution may be offered of the many


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 189
geometrical illusions. A paper which I hold in my hand is
covered with lines which, though equal, are made by the addi-
tion of suitable "trick " strokes to appear strangely different in
length. Similarly, by the play of cross strokes, curved lines can
be made to " look " straight, or parallel lines to seem convergent.
Now, however much I may rub my eyes to assure myself
that the illusion is none of my own making, and that the
"error" lies in the picture, the fact remains that the visual
impressions are free from all reproach. If I judge that curved
lines are straight, the error lies in my judgment, which is false
because one of the necessary conditions of validity has not been
fulfilled. For a clear image to be obtained, there must be no
disturbing phenomena like shadows, strokes, or other sources
of trickery. To judge the straightness, parallelism, or equality
of lines, in other words, we must see that the figures are free
from concomitant disturbing factors.
Briefly these illusions only suggest that there are stringent
conditions for the validity of all our judgments. They do not
in the least tell against the validity of our considered judg-
ments, if care be taken to fulfil the necessary conditions of
sharp perception, to mark defects, to make allowances, to
follow the facts and to avoid precipitation.
The second type of illusion is more akin to a momentary
hallucination in which, owing to a play of light and shadow,
I imagine the presence of somebody or something. Such
phenomena or rather such judgments present no difficulty in
our study. Where they are found, their illusory character
stands revealed by the "strong right arm" argument, beloved
of all plain men. A "somebody" or "something" ought
to be capable of producing in us a tactile as well as a
visual impression. If therefore the supposed "some-
body" yields no resistance to the stealthy pressure of my
fingers, or the more vigorous use of my foot, I can readily
convince myself that I have been deceived in the failing light.1
1 Huxley, it will be remembered, advised a widow lady, who against
her better judgment seemed to "see " her husband in his arm-chair, to


19o REALITY AND TRUTH
Even at the risk of repetition may we be allowed to enforce
our previous findings? The error in this case once again
lies not in the light-impression, but in the judgment that I
make of the presence of something. It may even happen
that I feel incapable of making any other judgment. That
matters little. I have judged, when one of the "sine qua
non" conditions of valid judgment, to wil, the presence of
sufficient light was absent. I can only blame myself for being
precipitate. The conditions of valid knowledge turn out, on
analysis, to be both numerous and stringent. If they are ful-
filled, then our knowledge of things is as secure as the Principle
of Causality.
The Difficulty of Hallucinations.
IV. For the sake of completeness, a word about hallucination
may be welcome. By an hallucination we mean a conviction
of the presence of something which has no real extra-mental
existence. Thus a person in delirium may "see" a tiger
springing from the foot of his bed, or a mentally unbalanced
person may hear imaginary voices which reiterate the same
abusive observations with strange persistence. Associated
with conditions of insanity, delirium, or high fever, these
occurrences are obviously pathological. One person in an
abnormal state of health "sees" or "hears" something which
a number of normal, healthy people cannot see or hear.
Once again one of the indispensable conditions of valid
judgments is absent, to wit, the normal functioning of the
nervous system which controls the organs of vision and
hearing.
Let us take the case of the patient in delirium. Owing to
undue nervous excitation, the ordinary imagery which passes
quietly through our consciousness, almost unheeded, becomes
in his case highly accentuated. Instead, therefore, of his
take her courage in both hands and to sit in that arm-chair herself. The
absence of pressure, he thought, would restore the normal condition of
consciousness.


THE VALIDITY OF KNOWLEDGE 191
having "healthy" schematic image of a tiger, he is presented
with a picture as vivid as that of a big-game hunter in the act
of shooting his quarry. His mind, loosened in the delirious
state from all sober conditions and laws, projects the tiger into
space, and then lies shuddering at the wild thing of its own
making. From its very inception the judgment, not to say the
whole judgment-process, is vitiated by the presence of a patho-
logical condition of the nerve centres. Obviously, therefore,
hallucinations present no lasting difficulty to the philosopher
bent on establishing the possible validity of knowledge. Con-
ditions, positive and negative, must be fulfilled: that is all.
With the solution of this difficulty, we may close our review
of the facts.
Summary and Conclusion.
In the foregoing pages we have tried to lead the reader
through the ways of a labyrinth, for this enthralling question of
the validity of knowledge can be likened to nothing else unless
it be to a dense, trackless forest. As the result of a careful,
analytic consideration of facts, difficulties, and problems, we
have established the possibility of an accurate application of
our sensations and concepts to the world that lies outside us.
The pitfalls and straggling paths that lead nowhere, as we have
seen, are many—so many indeed that our solution cannot be
deemed unduly sanguine. We have shown that if care and
patience be expended in collecting, sifting, "verifying" the
data of our experience, our knowledge will be valid. At the
same time, it follows that any particular element of knowledge
is open to question, until we have examined its foundations in
our sensible experience, and eliminated therefrom every vestige
or possibility of error.
There is no air of ease or triumph in such a philosophy; no
consecration of "simple solutions" or first impressions. It
rather suggests that the way of the philosopher is like the
rough, arduous ascent of a mountain, whose path winds back
again and again on its own tracks as it slowly approaches the


192 REALITY AND TRUTH
summit. The mountain air is invigorating, a veritable "haustus
divini aeris," and the hope beats high that the vision from the
crest of uplands will reward the climber's effort. In our case
that hope is fulfilled. In spite of many stringent conditions,
and in spite of the almost unlimited possibilities of deviation,
we see plainly that we can have valid knowledge of the nature
and qualities of things.
Neither of nature nor of quality can our knowledge be im-
mediate or direct. We know the qualities of things indirectly
by their effects on our consciousness, and knowing these
qualities, we have some further indirect knowledge of the
nature which supports them, and of which they are the con-
natural manifestations. Reality is thus grasped by the mind in
a way that is proper to itself. From first to last, as we have
seen, that way is no more than a restrained assertion of the in-
defectible Principle of Causality. We know the causes in the
effects, and the efforts are immediately present to us in the
elementary data of sensations and purified concepts.


CHAPTER IX.
THE NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDOE.
Since we fixed the scope of our inquiry, and the critical
nature of our method, our thought has moved from point to
point under the impulse of its own inherent dialectic. While
making no assumption, we have striven to forget no relevant
fact or difficulty in our effort to provide a lasting philosophic
solution of the five questions with which we started. The first,
it will be remembered, has already been answered in no un-
certain manner. We can both know and prove that there ex-
ists outside us a real world of persons and things. The second
question—Can we know the nature of that world, not only that
it is, but what it is?—has also, in the last chapter, received a
decided, affirmative reply. We can have, not immediate and
direct, but valuable indirect knowledge both of the nature and
qualities of surrounding things—sufficient both to distinguish
and to define them. Moreover, in answer to the third question,
we have shown the possibility of discerning valid from invalid
knowledge. Valid knowledge is gained, when all the neces-
sary conditions of "just" perception have been fulfilled, by a
patient, restrained application of the causal principle to the
objects of our thought. There remain, then, only the two
other leading problems dealing with the criteria and nature of
certitude and truth, which we shall discuss in our next chapter.
For the moment we shall turn aside to consider the nature
and scope of our knowledge. It is not enough to know that
our cognitive processes can be validly applied to the outside
world. We must inquire how far the domain of valid know-
ledge extends. Where are the boundaries fixed both for men
193 13


i94 REALITY AND TRUTH
in general and for single individuals? When can our reason
descry the sign that further trespass is liable to the penalty of
incoherence? Again, what is it, deep down, psychologically,
which makes us capable of knowing anything and which at the
same time fixes the frontiers beyond which we may not pass?
What, in other words, is the intrinsic law governing the scope
of our knowledge? A solution of these questions is clearly an
urgent necessity.
Our Knowledge Sense-Bound.
I. In our seventh chapter we discussed the leading char-
acteristics of our knowledge, its two-fold character and dis-
tinctive operations. By our intellectual operations, which are
irreducible to any sensation, imagery, or sensorial complex, we
grasp the being of things—the existence of an "other "—the
nature of which we conceive in terms of the properties, activities,
reactions which are registered in sense-perception. Our in-
tellect by a combination of the concept and the judgment-
process becomes aware of the nature of things in terms of their
qualities, which qualities are translated for us in our sensorial
impressions. The stimulus of both sensation and intelligence
is the object on which our attention is fixed. But there is this
one great difference between our cognitive processes: whereas
the object stimulates the sense-impression immediately, without
any intermediary, it only stimulates the intellectual process,
mediately, by means of the sense-impressions. Obviously,
therefore, our intellectual knowledge, while being separate and
distinct, leans heavily upon its sensorial companion.
Our sensations, indeed, are the foundation, the stimulus, the
starting-point of all our psychological events, and of all our in-
tellectual operations. Without them the intellect would remain
unstimulated, reduced to sterility. Without our sense-impres-
sions, we could enjoy no grasp of the qualities or activities of
things, no knowledge of their distinguishing characteristics.
Even the thought of the existence of things—the fact that they
are, apart from what they are—does not strike us until some


NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE 195
one or other of our sensations has been aroused by their pres-
ence. Our knowledge, therefore, from first to last is sense-bound.
There is no knowledge of any existence which does not de-
pend upon sense-perception for its initiation. There is no
knowledge of any essence or nature, which can be expressed
other than by the presence or absence of those qualities which
we perceive through the senses. All that we know, as has been
said, comes to us through the five tiny avenues of the senses.
One. conclusion stands out, therefore, with uncompromising
clearness from this first brief synthesis of our findings. We
can only have positive knowledge of the world of persons and
things; of natures which are capable of eliciting sensations within
us; of things, that is, which are extended—in a word, of the great
Material Universe. To use a well-known phrase, our positive
knowledge is bounded by the limits of "actual or possible
experience". Our sensations, and therefore our positive
thoughts, which together form the corpus of our positive
knowledge, are chained to matter, to things which we can
push and pull and weigh.
Pursuing our theme it is clear that we could never by any
chance have a sensation of what was wholly immaterial: its
presence would necessarily pass as unperceived to our senses, as
the currents that play their part in the depths of the sea. More-
over, we can never even imagine what the immaterial might
be, for imagination follows in the trail of sense-perception,
being nothing but its echo in consciousness. We are thus
bound by sense and imagination, to the things of space and
time, to material bodies which attract one another and which
are extended.
But, let it be observed, we can conceive, that is, by an intel-
lectual and not a sensorial or imaginative operation, we can
think the immaterial, just as we habitually think of God and
the Spirit world. There is nothing to prevent our intellect
from conceiving a being—intellect is the "gaoler" of being
—which is totally unlike the material things, of which we
have positive knowledge. Such conceptions of the immaterial
13*


196 REALITY AND TRUTH
world, of God and Spirits, may even be integrated into a body
of knowledge, as philosophers from the beginning have en-
deavoured to show in discussing the existence and nature of
God.
All such knowledge, however, is of a very special kind, which
separates it at once from our knowledge of the material world
in which we feel "at home ". There is no special science
properly so called of the immaterial world, of what cannot be
seen or heard or felt; no knowledge that is positive, immedi-
ate or direct. That knowledge, however valid, is usually
negative, and sometimes, as in the case of God, analogical,
but never by any chance positive.
Let us consider a few instances to elucidate this striking
limitation of our sense-bound knowledge. I think of a spirit,
let us say, as an zwmaterial, *«extended being. I think of
God as infinite or immense. Every one of the terms is nega-
tive. I have taken my ordinary positive knowledge, derived
from the world of things which will offer resistance to my
muscular effort, and seen its inapplicability to these immaterial
objects of my thought. This inapplicability is recorded and
asserted by the formation of the negative terms, immaterial,
infinite, and the rest . There is no trace of any positive con-
tent in any of these terms, though by constant use they grow
to assume a positive aspect—what could look more positive
than the term "spirit" ?—and sometimes if used unanalytically
a quasi-positive meaning.
All the things of which we have positive knowledge are
finite, bounded from without, that is, and intrinsically limited.
God, we think, indeed we can prove, is not as the things that
we know: He is bound/«« and unlimited. We then assert
the complete difference between God and the things of space
and time, by the use of a purely negative term,—infinite.
For the rest when our knowledge of the immaterial world is
not wholly and purely negative it is analogical. There is
some analogue between the intelligence of men and the in-
telligence of God, between the activity of men and the activity


NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE 197
of God. That is to say, between the being and intelligence
of a Spirit, and the being and intelligence of human persons,
we find some trace of resemblance, some faint analogy, while
at the same time we affirm, in a whole series of negative terms,
a multitude of clashing differences both in nature and mode
of being.
It is scarcely necessary to add that this negative and ana-
logical knowledge is true knowledge of the utmost value,
though it lacks the sensible content of our ordinary experience.
It is our only guide in those regions which would otherwise be
as remote from our thought as from our senses; as undreamt
of as an undiscovered continent or an unknown planet. But
the knowledge which is most characteristic of our nature is
marked with the unmistakable seal of matter. We are made
to understand positively if not exhaustively, things that are
coloured and divisible; things that we can push and pull, and
persons who share all these characteristics of matter, in addition
to their own distinctive qualities.
It is ever the same story. Ether, which we cannot see, nor
hear nor feel, which, in addition, cannot be weighed, is yet
thought to exist in the molecular interstices of matter, and
in the interstellar spaces. What do we say of it? Simply
that it is /Vwponderable—and for the rest, suggest some faint
analogy with the lighter gases.
In the foregoing paragraphs, we have traced one great frontier
of our knowledge. Of beings that are capable of eliciting
sense-impressions in our consciousness, we can have positive
knowledge, though it need be neither immediate nor direct. Of
all other beings, our knowledge can never be immediate, never
direct, never positive. It can only be negative or analogical.
Can the Individual Share the Experience of the Race?
II. Each individual person, then, stands facing this vast
complex world of persons and things, which he strives to em-
brace in his system of positive knowledge. Even of the
invisible world, his knowledge may be extensive, though never


198 REALITY AND TRUTH
positive. But the power of any single individual to collect,
sift, and verify the multitudinous facts of our sensible experience
and thus to build a well-founded, solid system of knowledge
is strangely limited. We naturally ask, therefore, how far we
can extend our knowledge, by incorporating the thought or
experience of others? How far can we profit by the experience
of the human race, and of our contemporaries? How far can
we extend the horizon of our own centre of experience by com-
munion with other minds? How much can we learn and how
much can we teach?
Can We Enter into the Thought of Others?
First, let us deal with the thought of others. We shall consider
their experience later. To begin with, there is no direct means
of communion between mind and mind. Telepathy is at least
unusual and always inexplicable. Intellect communicates
with intellect by means of conventional signs or sounds, each
appealing indirectly to the other through the medium of sense.
We may sometimes dream that we "feel" what is going on in
the mind of another; as though by long acquaintance we had
grown to dispense with the medium of sense, and to penetrate
the living mind. On second thoughts, however, we detect the
medium of sense clearly enough. Either there will have been
a thoughtful silence, which we have learnt to associate with
some mood of depression or resentment, or else we may have
made a rapid inference from a curl of the lip, the raising of an
eyebrow, the set of mouth and jaw, the light buoyant footfall,
the whole poise of the body, "touch of hand, turn of head," or
what not.
Thus if our thought of what proceeds in the mind of another
be not pure conjecture, either an inference from past experi-
ence, or a shot in the dark, we can always point to some
sensible fact, some sign or sound, which served as a means
of communication. In our many languages we are provided
with a standardized conventional group of sounds, by which we
can sometimes reveal our thoughts.


NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE 199
Let us suppose, then, that a man delivers himself of his
knowledge, by the use of an unequivocal series of sounds.
What then? Do I, who listen attentively, "enter " immediately
into his thought, or participate in his knowledge? No! the
law of causality is obeyed, and I register a corresponding
series of auditive impressions—no more. If I understand the
language, and if I am capable, owing to education or experi-
ence, of reproducing the thought, I may form certain concepts
and link them, like the speaker, in judgments and reasonings.
As the result of this intellectual effort, which is by no means
a necessary accompaniment of the sound impression, I may
indeed think the same thought as the speaker. But I cannot
be said for a passing moment to "enter" into his mind, or to
participate in his knowledge. There is no such thing as
thought transference; the thought is mine; the knowledge is
mine, produced by my own steady intellectual effort, though it
may indeed have been stimulated by words expressing the
thought of another. Before I know what another person is
thinking I must produce the thought myself. What if it be a re-
production for an onlooker? It is a production for me. Before,
then, I can widen my own experience by incorporating the
thoughts of others, I must think that thought for myself, just
as if it had never been thought before. Thus we can only
"enter" into the minds of others, by thinking the same
thoughts ourselves. Briefly, we do not "enter" into their
minds at all: we develop our own.
One additional fact is of importance. The unity and synthesis
given by one mind to its own thoughts, will undoubtedly render
the work of reproduction by another mind easier and swifter.
The fact remains that all such thought, however clear, however
concise, is no more than a stimulus from without, soliciting our
minds to develop themselves from within. If the flight of the
mind that communicates its thought is beyond our range, if the
language lacks felicity of expression, or is obscure, or if we who
listen do not understand the significance of the words and expres-
sions, we shall inevitably fail to develop a similar train of ideas.


200 REALITY AND TRUTH
Knowledge is not, strictly speaking, communicated: it is
stimulated. The thought that has been generated in one mind,
is generated once again in another, owing to some fundamental
similarity in power and experience between the two. Thus I
can and do widen my knowledge by incorporating the thoughts
and judgments of others, provided I have sufficient power and
experience to generate those thoughts and judgments for myself.
Can We Enter into the Experience of Others?
III. The term "experience" drives us further in our in-
quiry. Apart altogether from intellectual knowledge, how far
can we participate in the experience of others? How far can
I, as an isolated individual, understand the experience, the
sense-impressions, the feelings, the emotions, the desires and
delights, of my fellows? My experience is necessarily slight,
bounded by a hundred fretful conditions of place, time, en-
vironment, birth, education, and the rest. The experience of
the human race must be vast. How far can I, an individual
"strong in solid singleness," break down my confining barriers
and enter into this great patrimony? Could any question be
of greater human interest?
In order to think concretely, let us take a few examples:—
i. I, who have never travelled outside Europe, read,
deeply interested, the account of an Arctic expedition. I
marvel at the heroism of the men who could endure such in-
tense cold and hardship. I almost shiver at the thought of a
temperature of - 40°.
2. I, a man, watch a mother at play with her child. I
observe the affection, joy, and care; and turn, it may be, to
muse about the different loves that can stir the human soul.
3. A friend reports the death of his brother. I notice his
grief, and sympathize keenly.
How many of these experiences can I really understand?
And what is the principle or law at work, which determines
the extent of my vicarious experience? Let us take the cases
in order.


NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE 201
1. Though deeply interested in Arctic exploration, I have
never had the good fortune to leave Europe. On reading the
graphic account of some Polar expedition, I imagine the
numbing effect of some 40° of frost. In fact, I, who have
never known more than a few degrees, shiver at the thought
of 40°. Now I may shiver as much as I like: the fact re-
mains that I am incapable of understanding or realizing what
40° of frost can mean. I may, of course, recall cold weather,
and then proceed with chattering teeth, in imagination, to
intensify that cold until it has reached the Arctic limit.
All that is fancy, and between fancy and experience there is
fixed a gulf if not a chasm.
How often we fancy, with no little complacency, what an
experience will be like. The experience itself is recorded later,
and all seems strangely different. How many men, for in-
stance, after reading for two years the accounts of the furious
artillery bombardments on the Western Front, with all their
graphic details of uproar, crash, and illumination, have said
simply, on finding themselves in the trenches, that they had no
idea of the wildness or sublimity of it all? Between fancy
and experience there is fixed a gulf. In the same way I can-
not understand nor realize the temperature experience of the
explorer, any more than anyone else who has not endured
more or less the same cold.
Naturally as I have known cold weather, my experience can
offer some slight analogy. To that extent I can grasp the
nature of the explorer's temperature experience, though not
its intensity. To realize any experience fully—and what is the
lasting value of a half realization ?—it would seem that I must
have had an identical experience myself. The greater the
similarity between my own experience and that of another, the
greater will be my realization. For full realization, however,
we require practical identity of experience. The "law" seems
to be emerging already.
2. Of the real feeling of a mother for her child, every man,
including the father, must for ever remain ignorant. He can,


2o2 REALITY AND TRUTH
of course, observe the manifestations of a mother's feeling
in her pride and joy, her patient understanding, her willing
sacrifices, and to this extent enjoys an indirect knowledge of
what the cause of all these manifestations must be. But the
real experience is something into which he can never "enter";
something which he can never fully grasp. Only a woman
who has herself been a mother can ever understand the fulness
of it all. The father can never know by intimate personal
experience what may be the characteristic feeling of a mother
for her child; nor can she ever grasp the real inwardness of a
father's experience. They can only meet on the common
ground of affection, care, and joy.
Once again, where there can be no similarity of experience,
there is no real participation, no full understanding.
3. My friend's brother has died. I sympathize profoundly.
Yes! but do I understand his desolating experience?
If my own brother has died, I am in a position to grasp
my friend's experience fully and really. If a great friend, or
near relative of mine—not a brother—has ever died, I can at
least parallel my friend's experience with something similar in
my own. If I have never known what it is to grieve for rela-
tives or friends, who have died, then all my sympathy is
prompted, not by the fact of my friend's experience, but by
my thought or fancy as to what it must be like. One day the
death of an intimate friend will give me a rude shock, and I
shall gain a sense of the reality of things and of their strange-
ness. In that day I shall no longer fancy or think what the
experience of bereavement must be : I shall know.
The law, then, governing the expansion of individual ex-
perience is at length clearly discernible. To appreciate the
experience of another, I myself must have had undergone a
similar set of psychological events in presence of similar facts.
The greater the similarity, the greater the appreciation.
Where the similarity merges into practical identity, my appre-
ciation will, at last, be complete. Like knowledge, experience
is not transmissible: it develops from within.


NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE 203
Experience and Knowledge not Transmissible.
We may delay for a moment, in order to connect this
strange fact with one of our earlier findings. It will be re-
membered that in our seventh chapter, we found that we had
two characteristic modes or kinds of knowledge, the one sen-
sorial, the other intellectual. Intellectual knowledge bears
the stamp of generality, whereas our sensorial experience is
particular, signed and sealed, as we said, with a multitude of
r individual, "one and one only," characteristics. On account
of its generality and relative fixity, we saw that intellectual
knowledge might be expressed in words: we have now deter-
mined the measure in which that outward expression of my
thought can be understood by another.
Sensible experience, on the other hand, with all its clinging
attributes of particularity, remained, as we saw, inexpressible in
the generalized terms of any language. It is inarticulate, the
personal, inalienable property of each individual. We have
now seen that another individual must have had a similar or
identical experience, in order to understand what transpires in
my consciousness. The two findings agree, and even give a
satisfying explanation, each of the other. The limits of indi-
vidual experience are more fretfully narrow than we sometimes
dream.
And yet could anything be clearer or more demonstrable
from the lives of individuals and communities than this law
that experience is not transmissible? In spite of the most
careful reading of biography and history, in spite of the solemn
warnings of older and more " experienced" people, we indi-
viduals continue to repeat the old blunders in our lives. We
await the coming of the experience that shall illuminate our
minds, and render us graver, wiser men. In our youth we
listen to advice, sometimes with docility, sometimes very unwill-
ingly. As a result, thoughts may beat in our minds, but the
real meaning and value of those thoughts, good or bad, can
only come later, with the dawn of that experience which our


204 REALITY AND TRUTH
elders perforce gained for themselves. The one hope of pro-
gress lies in having elders who are capable of integrating their
experience, of extracting wisdom from a multitude of varying
events—experience does not necessarily come with age—and
in having younger people who will listen with docility. The
combination is rare.
With communities, nations, governments, the same truth
holds. Wherever we look, whether it be to a village commun-
ity in India, to a city-state in the ancient world, to a modern
nation or empire, we shall find that the old political, social,
economic troubles repeat themselves with unfailing regularity.
The struggles, revolutions, rebellions, wars that mark our pro-
gress, show all too clearly that each community and each
government must gain its own experience. Briefly, experience
cannot be "thrust" upon individuals or nations from without:
it develops, slowly enough, from within. We participate, then,
in the lives of others, in the measure of our own experience.
By this real participation, moreover, we individuals lose the
sense of our loneliness; we break down the barriers that divide
us from the race of men; we feel a oneness of aim and aspira-
tion, in a word of experience, with our fellows. And by this
real participation, we understand more fully the enigmatic
currents and cross-currents of our own strange eventful
history.
The Law of Knowledge Demands some Similarity
between the Knowing Person and the Known
Reality.
IV. In considering the scope of our knowledge from several
very different points of view, we have strangely enough come
to conclusions which present a common aspect. Is there, we
ask then, not unnaturally, some deeper principle, some more
fundamental law at work in all these cases? The whole dis-
cussion of boundaries and frontiers seems to turn on some
fact of similarity. Let us set out our conclusions briefly
enough.


NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE 205
(a) We, who are persons, can have positive knowledge of
persons and things, or to put it differently, we who are extended
and intelligent realities can only have positive knowledge of
other extended realities. The similarity of extension must
exist between the knower and the known. If the reality is
not extended, our knowledge is negative or analogical, or both,
but never positive. We are, in that case, reduced for the most
part to chronicling fundamental dissimilarities.
(6) The knowledge of other persons' thoughts and judgments
can, as we ordinarily say, be "communicated " to me, provided
I am prepared to make a corresponding intellectual effort.
For the communication and acquisition of knowledge, in other
words, there must be a measure of similarity both in capacity
and effort between the two minds.
(c) The experience of other men cannot be transmitted,
ready made. My understanding of their experiences of what-
soever kind depends upon the measure of my own. The
greater the similarity between the outer facts and inner events
of our lives, the greater will be my appreciation of their
experience.
In each case, therefore, the conclusion pivots on the fact
of similarity. The three cases, which cover the whole corpus
of human knowledge that can be communicated or acquired
other than by an act of faith, can be summarized in one great
inclusive law. Knowledge demands some similarity between the
knowing person and the known reality.
The Fact Behind the Law.
V. In our discussion of the nature and limitations of human
knowledge, we have been impressed throughout by one im-
portant fact. Knowledge is, in no sense, an external event
but an inner experience; not a mere casual "brush" with
reality followed by some pretentious, intellectual travesty of the
facts, but a realization within us of the reality that lies beyond.
We are, therefore, tempted to push our inquiry still further,
and to ask how this inner realization is affected. In other


2o6 REALITY AND TRUTH
words, what is the manner of our knowledge of things, other
than ourselves? What is the inner process, the secret of it all?
What is the governing process behind this strange law that
knowledge demands some similarity between the knowing
person and the known reality? Is it possible, we ask, that
just as we must necessarily "live " an experience before it can
be understood, that we may too in some sense "live" the
reality of the things we know; that the soul of a man should
for the fleeting moment of knowledge become what it knows;
that in the classical phrase "17 i/'vx') ™ °Kra '™s '(7T' "-ovra ".
Let us review the outstanding facts of our knowledge, lest
perhaps this attractive theory should captivate our thought, and
blind us to its own difficulties. Of what nature are the realities
that I know? For the sake of clearness, we may make a list
of them.
A Classification of Known Reality.
1. There is the vast world of Inorganic Matter, which is
studied by the chemists, mineralogists, and geologists. This
matter is known to us as a being or a reality which reveals
itself in the inalienable property of extension, and which enjoys
a strange, measurable, magnet-like attraction for everything
else of the same kind. Naturally, any given specimen, whether
it be element or compound, solid, liquid, or gas, will possess,
over and above extension and attraction, a number of indi-
vidualizing or rather specific properties. The innumerable,
differentiating features, however, all fall within the "cadres"
of extension and attraction.
2. From non-living, inorganic things, we naturally pass to
think of Living Matter, which is studied by botanists, zoologists,
physiologists, anatomists; in a word, by all who devote them-
selves to one or other branch of biological science. This vast
realm of life is divided into the vegetable and animal kingdoms,
and the animal kingdom in its turn is divided into human
beings, and the lower non-rational animals. Briefly, we can
1 Aristotle, " de Anima," r 8.


NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE 207
classify living matter under the three headings of vegetative,
animal, and personal realities. A word about each.
(a) A vegetative form of life is known to us as a being or
reality which, in addition to the extension and attraction pro-
perties of inorganic matter, enjoys the triple power of nutrition,
growth, and reproduction. This triple biological function is
pursued through a series of immanent changes, which while
being stimulated from without, are developed from within. A
neatly articulated engine or machine, some one suggests?
"Assuredly," we may reply with Prof. J. Arthur Thomson,
"the organism may be called an engine, but it must be re-
membered that it is a self-stoking, self-repairing, self-preservative,
self-adjusting, self-increasing, self-reproducing engine!" The
differences in green cells might be multiplied indefinitely, and
indeed a number of general properties common to the whole
species might be added. Let the broad indication suffice. A
vegetative form of life is an extended reality which pursues
the triple "biological" function through a series of immanent
changes.
(6) A lower animal—we say lower to distinguish it from the
rational or personal type—is known to us as a being or reality,
which, like all matter, is extended; which, like vegetative matter,
enjoys the triple power of nutrition, growth, and reproduction,
to be pursued through an untiring series of immanent trans-
formations; and which, over and above, possesses the property
of sentience, the power of sensation and sensorial awareness.
The sense process, once again, is immanent: stimulated
from without, it is consumed and terminates within, unlike the
transitive action of my arm, let us say, which, in moving, may
shatter a glass and thus lead to results in the world "outside ".
Animals, of course, differ in a thousand ways. We have only
attempted to "hit" the distinguishing characteristics of the
whole genus. Briefly, a lower animal is an extended reality,
which, in addition to the vegetative powers, enjoys the pro-
perty of sensorial awareness.
(c) A person is known to us as a being or reality, which,


208 REALITY AND TRUTH
like all material things, is extended; which, like vegetative
matter, enjoys the triple "biological" function; which, like
non-rational animals, enjoys the power of sentience; and which,
over and above all these characteristics, possesses the intel-
lectual power of conceiving ideas, of judging and of reasoning.
For the sake of brevity when we wish to define, we usually
refer to a person as a rational animal.
This closes our knowledge of the outer world ofliving things.
3. But there is one other reality of which we have specific
knowledge, the reality of our personal selves. There is no
direct, immediate "seizure " of the self, no intuitive grasp of
what we are. Like all else, we know what we ourselves are,
by what we do, by our typical reactions, properties, activities.
What, then, are we to ourselves, from the restricted angle of
vision of the epistemologist? We are known to ourselves as
beings or realities, which enjoy the joint properties of inorganic
matter of vegetative and animal life, and of that rationality
which we perceive in other persons. In other words, our
activities include all the typical reactions of all those things of
which we have any positive knowledge.
If matter is extended: so are we. If it is attracted by
other matter: so are we. If vegetative forms of life can grow:
so can we. If animals have finely-developed sense-percep-
tions, and the sensorial memory that goes with them: so have
we. If other persons have all that we mean by the intellectual
powers, and self-consciousness: so have we. There is thus
something all-inclusive in the nature of the human person.
We are, in some sort, all that we can positively know.
Knowledge Involves a Coincidence of Activities.
Why, then, if we by nature are in some sort all that we can
know, should we not become what we know, for the fleeting
moment of our contemplation? Why, at the moment of
knowledge, should we not develop, within ourselves, the >
activity which corresponds to that of the,reality we perceive?
Why, in that case, should knowledge not be in very deed a


NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE 209
realization within us of the real that lies beyond, a momentary
living the life of another, a concentration of our attention upon
a reality which we grasp on account of its fundamental
similarity or identity with our own nature? Why should
knowledge not be thus explained as a coincidence of activities
within and without?
Remember that strange, governing law which set us musing.
Knowledge demands' some similarity between the knowing
person and the known reality. If we are, in some sort, poten-
tially all that we can positively know, and if we, in the act of
knowledge, become accidentally and fugitively what the known
reality is substantially and permanently, then the fundamental
reason of this governing law of similarity stands revealed.
Knowledge demands some similarity because it is founded upon
a partial or complete coincidence of activities. In no sense,
therefore, can knowledge be regarded as an external event, a
mere "brush" with reality, or an effort to distort things to the
likeness of ourselves, to suit the exigencies of our own minds.
It is a real inner appreciation of the community of nature, or
community of aspect between things and ourselves :—a revela-
tion both of the world and of ourselves at one and the same
time to our own minds.
Bergson's Anti-Intellectual Philosophy Fails.
How far in all these considerations we have wandered from
the contemporary cry against "the pretensions of intellect"!
M. Bergson, and his many disciples and admirers at whose
doctrine we may glance in passing, would have us believe that
our intellects are incapable of grasping the warmth, the
plasticity, the changefulness of reality. The intellect is at
home in thinking of points, lines, planes, in dividing up material
things into material parts, in manipulating solids: it flounders
hopelessly in endeavouring to represent "le jaillissement
perpetuel," the unending, creative becoming of things. Our
intelligence was not made to understand the heart and soul of
things: it was developed to help us to make rabbit-hutches
»4


2io REALITY AND TRUTH
and steam-engines. "... Les tendances intellectuelles,
aujourd'hui innées, qui la vie a dû créer au cours de son
évolution, sont faites pour tout autre chose, que pour nous
fournir une explication de la vie. " 1 "... On pourrait dire de
la vie, comme de la conscience, qu'à chaque instant elle crée
quelque chose. Mais contre cette idée de l'originalité et de
l'imprévisibilité absolues des formes, toute notre intelligence
s'insurge. Notre intelligence ... a pour fonction essentielle
d'éclairer notre conduite, de préparer notre action sur les
choses. . . ."2
Elsewhere we read: "L'erreur ... est d'étendre trop
loin l'application de certains concepts naturels à notre intelli-
gence. Originellement nous ne pensons que pour agir. C'est
dans le moule de l'action que notre intelligence a été coulée.
La spéculation est un luxe, tandis que l'action est une néces-
sité." »
And the whole condemnation of our power of knowing is
given in the following significant words that have been quoted
so often by M. Bergson 's critics: "Si nous pouvions nous
dépouiller de tout orgueil, si, pour définir notre espèce, nous
nous en tenions à ce que l'histoire et la préhistoire nous
présentent comme la caractéristique constante de l'homme et
de l'intelligence, nous ne dirions peut-être pas Homo sapiens
mais Homo faber. En définitive, l'intelligence, envisagée dans ce
qui en paraît être la démarche originelle, est la faculté de fab-
riquer des objets artificiels, en particulier des outils à faire des
outils, et d'en varier indéfiniment la fabrication." *
The operation of our intelligence is often considered by
M. Bergson, particularly in the "Evolution Créatrice," and
as often condemned. Its static, piece-meal way of "seizing"
things, makes it an excellent instrument for considering
anything as unreal as geometry, or for executing plans of
artificial things like engines, tools, machines. When turned
to consider reality in all its variety and inconstancy, in all its
1 "Evolution Créatrice," p. a2. »Op. cit. p. 31.
'Ibid., p. 47. tIbid., p. 151.


NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE 211
unforetold possibilities, it "immobilizes '' and thus deforms the
truth of things. Man is a homo fabcr, not, as we proudly think,
a homo sapiens. In these words the very possibility of a " just"
intellectual appreciation of things is dismissed.
Intelligence, then, can help us in anything practical and
artificial, as, for instance, to set up a "science " of engineering,
and to make plough-shares, engines, and means of transport.
To philosophize, M. Bergson would have us develop our
dormant intuition, our human instinct, which has been almost
suffocated by our worship and use of intelligence. By means
of instinct we break away from the external quasi-geometrical
view of things, and grasp things "par le dedans" in knowledge
which is real and "interne ". This intuition, which is to
replace the old cumbersome, deforming intelligence, is a
"sympathie divinatrice,"1 "quelque chose d'immanent et
d'essentiel "8 yielding "une vision intégrale, quoique sans doute
évanouissante de la poussée vitale ".s For our intelligence to
gain this intuition "il faudrait qu'elle se détachât du tout fait et
s'attachât au se faisant. Il faudrait que, se retournant et se
tordant sur elle-même, la faculté de voir ne fit plus qu'un avec
l'acte de vouloir."*
By this "effort douloureux," which is accomplished by
doing violence to nature, "en violentant la nature," we shall
possess the Bergsonian intuition, "cette espèce de sympathie
intellectuelle par laquelle on se transporte à l'intérieur d'un
objet pour coincider avec ce qu'il y a d'unique et partant d'in-
exprimable."6
The words "coïncider," "unique," "inexprimable," set us
thinking. Without any "effort douloureux," without doing
violence to nature, we showed that our knowledge may be truly
regarded as a "coincidence of activities within and without,"
"a realization within us of the real that lies beyond ". The
fulness of that knowledge can never be expressed, and there-
1 " Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale," 1903, p. 1.
*" Evolution Créatrice," introd., p. 5.
* Op. cit., Introd., p. 5. *Ibid., p. 258.
•" Revue de Métaphysique et de Morale," 1903, p. 3.
M*


2i2 REALITY AND TRUTH
fore never communicated, for our sensations are as unique and
therefore incommunicable as the unique realities which they
make known to us. Part at least of M. Bergson's dream of
a real "science interne," which shall grasp the reality of things
inwardly and truly, is realized—d son insu—in our sensible and
intellectual knowledge, which he condemns with such uncom-
promising vehemence.
When M. Bergson wrote his condemnation of intelligence,
and set forth the "new" and "painful " method of intuition,
he must have forgotten all those facts which led us to conclude
that our knowledge was a real inner experience. Fixing our
eyes on the facts, forgetful for the moment of the antagonistic
system of the French philosopher, we wrote: "In no sense,
therefore, can knowledge be regarded as an external event, a
mere ' brush' with reality, or an effort to distort things to the
likeness of ourselves, to suit the exigencies of our own minds.
It is a real inner appreciation of the community of nature or
community of aspect between things and ourselves:—a revela-
tion both of the world and of ourselves, at one and the same
time, to our own minds."
When M. Bergson wrote so contemptuously of our intelli-
gence, he must have forgotten that strange comprehensiveness
of our activities, which are so fully representative of all things
that we can positively know. He must have forgotten that we,
once stimulated from without, draw our appreciation of what
things are from within. He must have forgotten the long line
of Greek philosophers, who, in the spring-time of philosophic
speculation, in spite of almost innumerable mistakes, discussed
the manner of our knowing with such power and vision. He
must have forgotten that haunting doctrine of Aristotle, "il
maestro di color che sanno," given in the line: "17 ifrvx^ra
Light from Greece.
With a certain sense of liberation we turn to give an outline
of the Greek philosopher's thought.


NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE 213
The older Greeks, when they discussed the theory of know-
ledge, seemed to have " struck" the real difficulty. They saw,
with their strange philosophic acumen, that if knowledge is 'to
give us a true representation of reality, it must be effected by
the presence of something representative within us. What, then,
was the inner representative of the outer reality? Democritus,
the great disciple of Leucippus, who followed his master in the
whole theory of Atoms and the Void, gave a purely mechanical
solution. Knowledge, he said, was effected by the presence of
tiny representative particles—the famous ccSuXa—which streamed
from the outer reality through the channels of the senses.
Sensation, in fact, was a real impounding of representative
atoms, a seizure, a participation.
He might, indeed he actually did dismiss sensation as
"bastard " knowledge, in comparison with "true born " know-
ledge which lay "in the depths". "By use (vo/i<a)," he said
(frag. 125), "there is sweet, by use there is bitter; by use
there is warm, by use there is cold; by use there is colour.
But in sooth (ireg) there are atoms and the void."l
The fact remained that he had, in propounding his ultra-
mechanical theory, made one of the most hopeful mistakes
in the history of Greek philosophy. Prof. Burnet gives
his theory in the following condensed words: "As the soul
is composed of atoms like everything else, sensation must
consist in the impact of atoms from without on the atoms of
the soul, and the organs of sense must be simply 'passages'
(irofjot) through which these atoms are introduced ".*
Aristotle, impressed with the same necessity of finding inner
representatives of outer reality, wrenched the Democritan theory
from its wild metaphysic of "Atoms and the Void," gave it a
"twist," a new setting and propounded the truth. Within
us, we have, not material atoms, he said, but their forms; not
matter but form or activity. "ou yap 6 Aitfos iv tq i/rvxij, aAAa
to e!8os." 3 Our mind, in other words, grasps external reality,
1 Quoted by Prof. Burnet, " Greek Philosophy," Part I, p. 197.
1 Op. cit. p. 196. » Aristotle, "de Anima," r 8.


2i4 REALITY AND TRUTH
because our comprehensive activities include the activity of the
thing perceived. The representative of the outer world is thus,
not matter, streaming through the senses, but the form or
activity, the specific determining factor in the nature of things,
which is somehow present in consciousness at the moment of
knowledge. Dismissing the theory of the migration of material
atoms, Aristotle equally dismissed any idea of the migration of ,
forms. There is no necessity for any migration "^\pvxriTa
mrra 7to1s ( u t i irivTa "—the human principle of activity includes
the activities of all things that it can positively know.
We need not further develop the theory of Aristotle in all
its ramifications of " matter" and " form," or, as we might say
in English, of Determinable and Determinant. He saw clearly,
as we have been led to admit by a review of the facts, that the
human soul, or principle of activity, includes within its ample
scope all the known activities of persons and things; that we
have knowledge of the nature of things by means of their
activities; that in consequence we understand the nature of
things by grasping, at the moment of knowledge, their partial
or complete community of nature with ourselves. From the
jaded, anti-intellectualist cry of our contemporaries, from their
ail-too hurried survey and condemnation of our powers of know-
ing, we turn, as ever, for wisdom and refreshment to the
oracles of Greece, and above all, to the princely Aristotle.
Though he left many of the problems of epistemology unsolved,
indeed untouched, he at least saw far into the nature and scope
of our knowledge—" r) \lfvj to ovto. ircos iari vavra ".
Summary of the Laws of Knowledge.
A word by way of summary of this chapter may be welcome
in conclusion.
We have a vast amount of real, positive knowledge of
persons and things. To the theme of our negative knowledge
we need not revert again. Now the two outstanding facts
or laws which govern the acquisition of knowledge are
these:—
r
■■
*


NATURE AND SCOPE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE 2 15
1. Reality is grasped by the mind in a way that is
proper to itself.
2. Knowledge demands some similarity between the
knowing person and the known reality.
3. Knowledge is ultimately based upon a coincidence
of activities between the person and the reality.
In the act of knowing, we somehow become what we know.
We do not deform reality, nor set bounds to its changefulness.
The plastic nature of things does not escape us. The untiring
changes, which so often make of the world a scene of such
freshness and splendour, are interpreted for us by the law of
causality, on which all our knowledge pivots for its justification.
We, by our steady vision, catch the fact of recurrence, the
reign of law, the cyclic order of change, amidst all the instability
of things.
By our intellects we seize the nature of reality, which is
relatively constant: by our senses we seize all its diversified
inconstancy, and all its recurring activities. By the joint pro-
cesses of our knowledge, we can know positively, securely,
indirectly, all that is partially or wholly identical with ourselves,
in nature and activity.


CHAPTER X.
CERTITUDE AND TRUTH.
After taking a reassuring glance at the nature and scope of
our knowledge, we revert to the age-long questions of certitude
and truth. There is no thoughtful man who in some moment
of heart-searching or of mental restlessness, in presence of
the inconstancy and bewildering complexity of things, and
stranger still, in presence of the unending contradictions in
the opinions and judgments of men, has not slowly asked
himself these questions. What is certitude? What is truth?
Where is the criterion of both to be found? Is truth attain-
able "on this side death"? Dare I believe anything calmly
and securely, unmindful of the possible criticism, the discov-
eries, the "new knowledge" of the morrow? Or is my
certitude, at best a hope, that my knowledge will not be
shattered in the onward march of the sciences?
In the world's happy childhood, men believed and clung
tenaciously to their convictions, "knowing" that they were in
possession of ultimate, irrefragable truth. Their peace and
security of mind, undisturbed by clinging, fretful doubts, ap-
peals to us all with undiminished force, and yet to many it
seems an unattainable ideal. Our knowledge has witnessed
many a rude shock, many an upheaval, in the intervening
ages, and some of us wait in suspense, wondering what new
vision of things may be communicated, even in our own day,
by the leaders of science and philosophy.
Who can see the green Earth any more
As she was by the sources of Time?
210


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 217
Who thinks as they thought,
The tribes who then lived on her breast,
Her vigorous primitive sons?
This tract which the river of Time
Now flows through with us is the Plain.
Gone is the calm of its earlier shore. . . .
How, amid the flux of opinion, shall a man be certain and
know that he "possesses " truth? The question is one which
appeals with incalculable force to plain men, and, "however
we brave it out," we are all plain men; though our considered
judgments need not betray too plain a realism.
The Nature of Certitude.
To begin with, what do we mean by certitude? Certitude
is a quality or aspect of a particular psychological state, or, as
we say ordinarily, of a frame of mind. Certainty, on the other
hand, is a quality of propositions; we speak of it currently as
attaching to this or that statement. Though, of course, the
"frame of mind" is induced by a " certain" proposition, the
distinction between certitude and certainty is none the less
real. It is only another aspect of the old difference between
'psychology and logic.
What, then, is the characteristic of this particular psycho-
logical frame of mind? Above all it is a state of repose
following upon our assent to the truth of a statement. After
much doubt, and, it may be, many misgivings, we acknowledge
the certainty of a political programme, of an ethical or religious
system, or of some philosophic code. The resultant state of
mind while it lasts—it may be rudely shaken or it may termin-
ate abruptly—excludes all denial, all doubt, and, at least, all
the more harassing difficulties which tend to make our ordin-
ary judgments rock and sway. The mind rests, calmly con-
vinced of the "truth" undisturbed by the possibilities of
criticism or future discovery.
We ourselves, for instance, after probing and endeavouring
to doubt the principle of contradiction, found that it was both


ai8 REALITY AND TRUTH
indubitable and undeniable in a strict and literal sense. Our
consequent state of mind a propos of this proposition, is one
of certitude. We are firmly convinced that nothing will ever
disturb our tranquil affirmation that "a thing cannot both be
and not be ". Though every other landmark in science and
philosophy should be obliterated in the forward march of
human knowledge, this principle will stand for ever.
In this chosen case, we can fortunately justify our convic-
tion, and silence even the last languid "how" or " why" of
the sceptic. But of the numerous certitudes in the minds of
men, who shall say the same? What of the clashing differences
in political, religious, philosophic conviction? What of all
those fundamental differences in belief and outlook, which in-
spire men to live and act, and which make of public life a
struggle between convictions, a strife and sometimes a tumult
of many conflicting voices? It may happen that a reflective
or sceptical mind may receive only "a dusty answer" when
"hot for certainties in this our life ". The fact remains that
most of us enjoy quite a number of settled convictions in un-
ruffled calm.
Certitude One in Kind.
Certitude, then, is a repose of mind in the act of affirmation.
Where that characteristic repose exists, there is certitude.
Once regarded as psychological states these certitudes are one
in kind, no matter how different may be the subject of the
affirmation. Thus in considering certitude, we prescind al-
together from the bases or motives of our judgment, as well
as from its subject-matter. The bases may be firm or un-
sound, the motives wise or foolish, the subject discussed may
be mathematics, history, metaphysics, theology or politics; it
matters not. If the resultant state of mind is one of repose ,
and freedom from all doubt, it is known as certitude.
It is well to bear in mind that certitude is one in kind and
indivisible, seeing that the fact is often enough obscured by
the uses of language. We speak of mathematical, meta-


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 219
physical, physical, moral, historical certainty and certitude,
and one might be led to think that these different certainties
give rise to characteristically different states of mind. The
simple fact is rather that certitude implies repose of mind in
a given affirmation, regardless of the particular object of our
thought. In singling out these descriptive epithets, mathe-
matical, moral, and the rest, we seem to be laying stress rather
on the subject-matter of our affirmation than on the repose of
our mind—to be losing touch with the unity of state, that is,
in the variety of object.
And if such epithets be allowed, why limit their number to
three or five? Why not add biological, zoological, economic,
political, and a multitude of others—one in fact for each de-
partment of human knowledge? We have never understood
why mathematics should be so specially favoured nor, for in-
stance, why " moral certitude" which as a rule implies not the
certainty but the high probability of the basic judgment should
figure in these classifications. Consciousness of possibility,
we know, and likewise consciousness of probability varying
from something just probable to something nearly indubitable.
Both are distinguishable from the repose of the mind, which is
freed from all lingering doubt in certitude. As, therefore, all
my judgments, whether of mathematics, ethics, physics or
history, can give rise to the state of certitude, it is better not
to single out qualifying or classifying epithets from the different
branches of knowledge.
Certitude Admits of no Degree.
Certitude, then, is one in kind. Unlike probability, it ad-
mits of no degree. We may hesitate or suspend judgment
about a proposition; we may regard it as possible or highly
probable; but once we are certain of its truth we achieve the
one, indivisible state of certitude which admits of alteration
indeed, but not of degree. We are either certain or we are
not. If certain then, we, freed from all doubt, rest calmly in
a particular judgment. Such a state admits of no varying


220 REALITY AND TRUTH
degrees, no sliding scale of intensity. Certitude, we may
y repeat, is characterized, first, by a calm affirmation, and
secondly, by freedom from doubt. Once we are certain of
anything, our state of mind shows both these characteristics,
which do not strictly admit of "more" or "less," in a word,
of degree.
It is only too clear, on the other hand, that the evidence
in support of any particular judgment may vary from the
merest hearsay or trivial prejudice, to an exhaustive survey of
all the relevant facts. The evidence, therefore, admits of
degree in sustaining or proving power. The same too may
be said of the value of the certitude. I may be "absolutely
certain " of a proposition in geometry, of the usefulness and
justice of some political scheme or, let us say, of my Christian
belief. The "values" attaching to the three certitudes is,
however, very different. My conviction concerning the two
sides of two angles of a triangle, though firm does not inspire
my life, and cannot be deemed a mainspring of action; where-
as my political beliefs may lead me into the arena to do
battle for a cause, and my religious convictions may be the
real inspiration and meaning of my life. Clearly my certitudes
can be arranged in a sliding scale according to their utility,
goodness, power, importance. The value of my certitudes, in
other words, admits of degree. Yet while the evidence and
value of my certain judgments eminently admit of "more"
and "less," the judgment itself, viewed intrinsically as a certi-
tude, excludes the very idea of degree.
Certitudes either Intrinsic or Extrinsic.
There is, however, one main division of all certitudes which
is highly important. They may be based upon direct, intrinsic
evidence, or lacking all intrinsic foundations for a particular
person, they may rely upon an extrinsic motive of credibility.
My certitudes, in other words, may be the result of some
personal "verification " or " demonstration "—however wide of
the mark either process may be—or may depend upon my


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 221
belief in the "word " or "evidence" of another. Briefly, the
motive—we are differentiating1 not according to the resultant
state, but according to its directing motive—may be either in-
trinsic or extrinsic. We do not, of course, wish to make too
"cut and dried" a division, nor to suggest the existence of
water-tight compartments. Any particular theory of life, or
system of science or philosophy, will, in all probability, com-
prise a number of intrinsic and extrinsic certitudes neatly ar-
ticulated in one structural whole. The fact remains that the
motivation of our certitudes reveals this deep-seated difference.
I may hold a proposition in geometry or some statement con-
cerning a chemical element, an Atwood's machine, an electric
dynamo, or a living cell by the intrinsic evidence of direct per-
ception. On the other hand, I may hold an historical proposi-
tion concerning the coronation of Charlemagne, the foreign
policy of Richelieu, or the accession of Queen Victoria, or
similarly, I may hold my religious beliefs, on the "authority " of
some credible, reliable witness.
Thus I may be "perfectly certain" of a remote historical
fact, of the geographical position of Petrograd which I have
never seen, or, shall we say, of the Resurrection of Christ,
owing to the "testimony " of credible witnesses. After review-
ing "the facts," we may discover a motive of credibility in
the trustworthiness of a friend, a traveller, or witness, and thus
be lead to accept their unverified statements. We all accept
a multitude of historical facts on the authority of historians;
of geographical facts on the authority of travellers; of political
events on the authority of our newspapers; of scientific dis-
coveries on the authority of some author, or professor, or
research student . Similarly those who are Christians hold
their religious beliefs on the authority of "the Church," the
authority of Christ,—ultimately on the authority of God.
It may seem that it would be simpler, in view of the explana-
tion, to divide certitudes into those of knowledge and those of
faith. Such a classification though undoubtedly useful would,
however, not be satisfactory. It might easily tend to obscure


222 REALITY AND TRUTH
the fact that much of our "knowledge " of science, philosophy,
and history is founded on "faith "; that we whose perception
and experience is confined within narrow limits, hold a multi-
tude of propositions, in all the departments of knowledge, on
the authority of others. The ultimate appeal, however, is
always to the intrinsic knowledge or inner experience of some
authority or witness.
We who listen or read trust the Professor of Sociology who,
for instance, collects and sifts the records of travellers and
missionaries. He in turn trusts these men, who have been
in immediate contact with, let us say, a tribe in Central
Africa. Some of their facts are the visitors' immediate per-
sonal observations of housing, clothing, and manner of living.
Others, perhaps, deal with the mentality and beliefs of the
tribe. To register accurate information on these points the
travellers or missionary will need to grow intimate with some
members of the tribe, in order to see how far their state-
ments are credible. His record of their mentality and beliefs,
after every allowance has been made for vagaries of language,
for suppressio veri and expressio falsi, will ultimately depend
upon the credibility of the tribesmen themselves, on their own
"knowledge," and their own "inner experience". Briefly,
our knowledge concerning the particular tribe depends in the
last analysis on the credibility and experience of the travellers,
and on the credibility and experience of the tribesmen; on the
direct perception of the European visitors, and the inner
knowledge of the natives. Thus our certitudes, based upon ex-
trinsic evidence, can all be tracked via this or that motive of
credibility to the evidence of one who speaks with the author-
ity of immediate knowledge.
No Special Criterion for Certitudes.
Certitudes, then, may be either intrinsic or extrinsic In either
case they may be true or false. What, then, is the criterion of
their validity? From first to last the validity of our certitudes
is bound up with the problem of truth. Our certitudes will be


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 223
valid, if the propositions to which we yield our assent are true.
There is no special criterion for certitudes—no distinguishing
feeling, perception, or intuition which marks the unquestion-
able validity of the accompanying repose of mind; no justifiable
criterion of luminous obviousness, such as the old Cartesian
clearness and distinctness; no justification above all to be
drawn from the intensity or vehemence of our convictions.
Whether we hold a belief with dignified calm, or with fanatical
zeal matters little: in either case our certitude may lack all
foundation in fact. Caprice or prejudice, education or environ-
ment, intellectual blindness or religious enthusiasm may lead
us to believe calmly in things that never happened, or to accept
propositions that are wholly mythical . No apodictic feeling,
no vigour of assertion, no vehemence of conviction, therefore,
can claim a hearing in this ultimate Court of Appeal. All
these feelings are no doubt of intense human interest, and may
sometimes even inspire a conviction that the accompanying
belief is well founded. Presumption, however, is not proof,
and these feelings, however intense, are not a criterion of
validity. Our certitudes are well founded and justifiable if
our judgments are true. From the question of certitude, we
are thus driven forward to consider the meaning and the criterion
of truth. The criterion of valid certitudes is identical with
the criterion of truth.
The Meaning of Truth.
At last, therefore, we turn and ask " What is truth?" What-
ever be the meaning or definition of "the true " and "truth,"
the terms are obviously used in two very different ways. First,
I may say, speaking of Shakespeare that he was a true poet,
and a true Englishman; speaking of a colleague that he is
a true friend; referring to a precious stone that it is a real or
true diamond. In our English tongue we thus use "real"
and "true" as interchangeable alternatives, whereas it is the
equivalent of our term "true" that is more frequently found
to serve this purpose in other European languages. Briefly,


224 REALITY AND TRUTH
we may designate an object as a true something. Secondly, I
may say, it is true that the theory of knowledge is intricate, or
it is true that elephants have long memories, or that right should
take precedence of might, and so forth for an unending series
of judgments. In other words, I may designate a proposition
as true, and speak of its truth. Truth, therefore, is applicable
either to objects or propositions. When applied to beings or
objects it is styled ontological; when used to express the
validity of propositions it is styled logical truth. Let us con-
sider each in order.
Ontological Truth.
First, what do we mean by ontological truth? What do we
mean by applying the term "true" to individuals? We may
hammer the answer out by the means of a simple instance.
We may say that So-and-so is a "true Englishman ". What
do we mean?
In the past, it may be that we have been brought much
into contact with Englishmen, and as a result, have been
led to detect their characteristic virtues and failings. Psy-
chologically an Englishman may come to mean a man who
exercises great and sometimes even studied restraint in the
expression of feeling; who is liable to sudden gusts of senti-
ment; who reveals an extraordinary doggedness and tenacity
of purpose; who is sincere in friendship and affection; who
dislikes any form of deceit; who clings to outward forms of
"propriety" and "decorum"; who holds the most decided
views on the rights and privileges of individuals, as against any
institution, corporation, or government; who shows a dispro-
portionate sense of national self-satisfaction, and a consequent
tendency to despise "foreigners "; who shows a lack of power
to think analytically in terms of principles, and who in conse-
quence perhaps is never wilfully intolerant or intransigent;
who trades with experience and loves compromise, as a way
out of difficulty; who is neither over-sensitive nor over-
imaginative; whose judgments for the most part are reflective,
measured, calm. . . .


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH a25
Thus my "concept" of an Englishman is that of an indi-
vidual who possesses or lacks a number of qualities. When,
therefore, I say that X is a true Englishman, I assert an
identity between the nature of X and the conceived nature of
an Englishman; between a reality of which I am immediately
cognizant and a reality of my past experience. So in the
same way I may think that Browning is a true poet. In the
past I have been led to conceive the nature of a poet. Now
I assert the partial or complete identity between the nature
of a poet and the nature of Browning; between the objects
of my present and of my past thought. In ontological truth,
in other words, we are dealing with partial or complete identity
or at least conformity, not between thought and thought, nor
between thought and object, but between object and object, thing
and thing.
We may state the case algebraically, as we did before, when
discussing the closely allied question of the validity of know-
ledge. Let us start with our former example that X is a true
Englishman. By dint of experience and reflection, I have
come to look upon A, B, C, D as the typical qualities of an
average Englishman. A, B, C, D are thus the translation in my
consciousness of the qualities belonging to a particular nature,
character, temperament, and disposition—that of an English-
man—which I style Nx. Of Nt I thus have positive though
indirect knowledge. Now I come across an individual, X.
In my consciousness I find the old group of concepts and
impressions A, B, C, D, or if not actually A, B, C, D, something
so very similar as to be practically identical. These translate
for me the characteristic moods, outlook, and reactions of
my friend X. They translate for me his particular nature,
character, temperament, and disposition which I style for con-
venience Ns. When I proceed to say that X is a true English-
man—using "true" in the ontological sense—I merely assert
the partial or complete identity of Nj and Na.
Neither Nx nor N2 is ever "in" my thought. They are
known to me indirectly by their properties which are trans-
15


226 REALITY AND TRUTH
lated from the order of reality to the order of knowledge in
ray sense-impressions. Ontological truth is thus in very deed
the truth of things; though naturally not of things conceived
in some philosophic vacuum, but of things apprehended by a
human mind with its twofold "knowing" process of intellect
and sense. Gathering together our ideas we can now give a
suitable definition. Ontological truth expresses a partial or
complete identification of the nature of some being or individual
with some other being of my past experience. So much for a
definition of our meaning. We shall return later to the inspir-
ing question of the necessary criterion.
We need not, here and now, raise the whole confusing de-
bate as to whether our thoughts are accurate or our knowledge
"real". Precisely in order not to confuse a main issue in
discussing the nature of truth, we cleared away all these
questions in our chapter on the validity of knowledge. There
we showed that the many possibilities of error in our know-
ledge may one by one be eliminated, leaving us in possession
of a fund of information, as irrefragable as the principle of
causality, or its protecting companion, the principle of con-
tradiction.
It is useless to indulge in recriminations against our powers
of knowing. They have their own stringent conditions of
validity, their own imperturbable indirectness, their own
governing laws and limitations. Nearly all the more funda-
mental difficulties against the "reality" of our knowledge
seems to spring from some misconception of its nature and
aim. Be that as it may, we showed in a former chapter that
our knowledge, if properly collected and sifted, may be per-
fectly valid. When, therefore, we define ontological truth as
an identification of the object of my present thought with the
object of my past experience, it is not necessary to ask if the
means of " perceiving" such identities are at my disposal. We
have already shown that our knowledge both of nature and
quality may be valid.


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 227
The Meaning of Logical Truth.
From ontological we turn to define its companion logical
truth. What do we mean when we say that a statement or
proposition is true? Before giving an answer, we must make
some sort of a rough classification of propositions, which can
of course be grouped in a hundred different and bewilder-
ing ways. As a rule, in formulating a proposition we assert
some one thing of another; but not always. We frequently
remark, "it is cold," "it is freezing,'' or make statements
of a similar kind which merely affirm the existence of some-
thing. In the same way we might say that America exists,
or that a particular prerogative of the English Crown still
exists. These and similar statements we shall style for our
purpose existential propositions. A more usual type, however,
is exemplified in such statements as "Cambridge is due north
of London," "mahogany is red," "camels are cantankerous,"
or what not.
While the first kind of propositions only affirm the exist-
ence of something, this latter kind tells us about some aspect
of the nature or quality of a thing. They may therefore be
called qualitative propositions. Now in spite of a multitude
of forms and differences, all these typical qualitative judg-
ments show a linkage of two terms. They may be abstract,
like the terms red, "cantankerous," or "due north," or general,
like "mahogany," or "camel," or particular, like Cambridge,
or Cheapside. Whatever be the kind of terms, at least two
are linked together in a qualitative proposition, and one is
asserted of the other. The type of judgment may therefore
be standardized in the old form "P is Q," beloved of the
logicians. Nearly all the statements that are ever made can
with a little good-will and rearrangement be thrown into this
standard form, and incidentally those, who remember their
first significant remarks and conversations in a foreign lan-
guage, will recall how much can be conveyed by simple asser-
tions of this " classical" form "P is Q ".
The trappings and ornaments of our own language, the use of
i5*


228 REALITY AND TRUTH
(
epithets and adverbs, of" as'es," and "buts," " somehow's," and
"lather's," of qualifying phrases and guarding clauses, tend to ob-
scure the gaunt frame-work of our assertions. Moreover, we re-
peat judgments that we have heard, and those which we have
once formulated tend to recur with almost fatal ease in our con-
versations. In this way we do not notice the application of
one "idea" to another, the slow linkage of terms in a judg-
ment, as we may so easily when we begin to deliver our minds
of their first brief observations in a foreign tongue. Whether
we think in Russian, French, or English, however, makes little
difference. We are for ever attributing one "representational
element" to another, hurling epithets at substantives or ideas
at one another.
Just, therefore, as ontological truth lay in some identity of
thing with thing, so logical truth deals with the conformity of
"thought with thought"; of some abstract or general term
with some other that may be abstract, general, or particular;
briefly of one representational element with another.
For our purpose in dealing with judgments in a broad
schematic way we divided them into two kinds, existential
and qualitative. We may now say a brief word about each
before defining logical truth.
How can we affirm an existential judgment that America
exists, that Australian aborigines still exist, or what not? The
answer is simple. By means of sense-impressions or thoughts,
or both, I am brought face to face with a particular reality,
styled America or an Australian "aborigine ". By an in-
stinctive immediate application of the principle of causality,
which may be amply justified, we assert the existence of the
reality. The whole procedure, so processless, so unargumen-
tative, so immediate, may be justified by the proof for the
existence of a real world which we have already submitted.
Existential judgments, therefore, prove tractable enough.
When, on the other hand, I make a qualitative judgment
P is Q, what do I mean? Presumably Q represents some
quality, aspect, or relation which is found to belong to my


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 229
representation of P: my thought or conscious representation
of P include Q. "Redness" belongs to mahogany: the
relation of being north of London belongs to Cambridge:
fractiousness is ever included in my representation of camels.
Now logical truth, which is the truth of propositions, will be
found when this supposed conformity of P and Q is really
justified. Logical truth, therefore, expresses the conformity,
applicability, or correspondence of the two terms of a proposition.
Just as ontological truth expresses the partial or complete
identity of two objects—the identity affirmed of the things,
being discovered by their "refraction" in consciousness—so
logical truth expresses the conformity or partial identity of
the two terms of a proposition. Briefly, truth always signifies
the conformity either of two realities or of two conceptual
elements, of thing and thing or of thought and thought.
An Easy and Dangerous Formula.
Throughout this brief treatment we have avoided the easy,
and not altogether felicitous definition that truth expresses
the conformity of thought and thing. No doubt the meaning
implied in such a definition is beyond all reproach. We only
observe that the expression is apt to falsify the meaning. It
has been indicated, not once but a hundred times by critics,
that there can be no real conformity of thought and thing,
of a conscious event with a physical reality. The thought
may indeed, as we have shown, be a valid representative of
the nature of that physical reality; but to be a satisfactory
representative does not induce conformity. This, however,
is only a question of terminology, and need not detain us
further.
The second criticism is much more vital. If truth, say
the critics, is defined as a conformity of thought and thing,
it is and must remain indiscoverable. My thoughts, I know,
but of what the thing "in-and-for-itself" may be, apart from
my thoughts, I know literally nothing. I cannot possibly first
think of my thoughts; then forgetting them for the moment,


23o REALITY AND TRUTH
register the nature of the physical reality by some other process;
and finally reconjure my thoughts and establish their conformity
with the "real" nature of the thing. Yet, some such psycho-
logical feat seems often enough to be implied in this defini-
tion of truth as the conformity of thought and thing. If the
philosophers, who use the definition, turn and say with some
trace of indignation or pity that they never even dreamt of
such a perversion, we accept their statement without question.
Their meaning, in other words, is incomparably better than
their expression.
May we remind them, however, that the plain realist, with
his indomitable objective bias, does actually seem to believe
in his power to check the thought of a thing by the very
nature of the thing itself? They are ready, moreover, to
expound their conviction in terms of the "mirror" imagery.
The mind "reflects" its object. Now the mirror may be
concave, convex, or a more reliable reflecting medium. If
one desires at any time to check the veracity of conscious-
ness, one has only to compare the reflection with the
object as one might compare a "through-the-looking-glass"
clock with the "clock itself". Could anything be more
simple or more impossible? One has only to "stand out-
side" oneself and compare the "mental reflection" with the
"real object"!
The truth is, however, even more simple. If our minds be
likened to mirrors—the imagery is even singularly apt if we
remember the limits of its range and application—we have a
double power. Either we may compare object with object, by
means of their reflections, or we may compare one reflection
with another; but to compare the object as an object with
the reflection as a reflection is "beyond the beyonds" of
human possibility.
It is well, therefore, to avoid any semblance of this ultra-
realist dream, or in other words, to avoid the curt attractive
definition of truth as a conformity of thought and thing. On
that account, we have maintained throughout that truth is


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 231
a conformity of thing and thing, or of thought and thought,
but never by any chance of thought and thing.
What Is the Criterion of Truth?
Having fixed our definitions, we turn to the mighty problem
of the criterion of truth. What is the test, the touch-stone of
which we may judge the validity of the supposed identities or
conformities which we style truth? What is the criterion of
truth?
In seeking criteria philosophers have almost exhausted \
the powers of human ingenuity. They have tried to discover'
criteria everywhere. Some have clung to a blind faith as the
only sure means of knowing anything, and have immediately
established some "authority" as the only unfailing criterion.
Others have sought a test in some decisive operation of the
will, such as the acceptance of "reasonable" postulates, or
in the immediacy of feeling, which carries conviction by its
volume or intensity. Turning from too frank an assertion of
the "will to believe" some have found a criterion in some
supposed inner illumination of mind, in the direct, clear,
vision which excludes all question and doubt, or in some
infra or supra intellectual power of intuition, which justifies
itself apparently by the fact that it is "given". Such criteria,
of course, are strictly esoteric: they are understood only by the
"illuminati" who cannot share their vision or intuition with
us "intellectualists ".
In times of distress, when the whole domain of philosophy
has been littered with broken systems, men have tested these
truths by the robust common sense of the human race, or by
some "consensus generis humani". Others, despising the
assertiveness of intellect, and feeling that thought was not
commensurate with experience, have set up some criterion of
the satisfaction of the whole man. That is true which stimu-
lates and satisfies intellect and feeling and all that makes us
men.
Nor are we yet near the end of our catalogue. Those


232 REALITY AND TRUTH
whose minds by their idealism have been driven inward, seek
the test of truth in some quality of thought itself. They have
singled out the quality of coherence or absence of contradiction,
together with comprehensiveness. "Truth," they say, "must
exhibit the mark of internal harmony, or again the mark of
expansion and all-inclusiveness." . . . The standard is positive
non-contradiction developed through comprehensiveness and
consistency. Others, naif realists by nature and conviction,
have fixed their hopes on "correspondence"—correspondence,
moreover, of thought and thing—as the ultimate test. And
lastly, for we must not turn our essay into a catalogue, there
are those who, turning their thoughts away "from first things,
principles, 'categories,' supposed necessities," look towards
"last things, fruits, consequences, facts". They judge—
though not exclusively perhaps—of the truth of a proposition
by its results. "The end verifies the means." Their criterion
is thus sought in adaptability to life and action, in general
utility, in power to give freedom to action and satisfaction to
thought
.
We men are known as beings who are capable among other
things of feeling, of will—by which we mean desire and de-
light, of intellect—that is conception, judgment, reasoning,
and of sensation. Every single one of these psychological
factors, and almost every possible combination of the group,
taken two or more at a time, has been singled out as the
standard or criterion of truth. Similarly, our judgments or
propositions may be regarded either for what they are, as
significant assertions, or for what they are worth as " dynamos"
in our lives. We may consider their foundation, their motive,
their actual implication or their value. Once again, every
single aspect of the judgment has given rise to a criterion
in some system of philosophy.
It would seem in very truth that in solving this inspiring
question philosophers have exhausted all the possible alterna-
tives. Now intrinsic to the knowing process, now extrinsic;
now psychological, now theological; sometimes one, some-


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 233
times another of the many aspects of the judgments itself,
these criteria mirror, with no little accuracy, the "zig-zag"
course of modern philosophy.
What, then, we ask, is the real criterion of truth? As we
cannot hope to do justice to all these systems and codes,
within the limits of one volume, we propose to abandon at
once the historical treatment. We shall simply endeavour to
show the characteristic notes of a true criterion, and then turn
to consider our own. The procedure, moreover, is interesting;
for as we consider, analytically, without any reference to the
conflicting systems, the indispensable qualities or notes of a
real criterion, many of the more extravagant tests that have
been offered slowly disappear into the vast region of the im-
possible.
The Notes of a Real Criterion of Truth.
1. The first indispensable note of a criterion of truth is
immediacy. It must be something that can be grasped and
fully understood at once, without parley or argument, in order
that it may be immediately applicable as a measure of truth.
If the criterion itself were not an immediate truth, something
that gains the immediate approval of our intelligences, it
would require an elaborate justification, another criterion.
"Nous voyla au rouet," as Montaigne would say. To attempts
one great journey in the effort to solve the problems of truth \
and knowledge, is the natural desire of all philosophers. To J
attempt a second to justify the first, and so on, with an ever-/
widening vision of labour, would weary a philosophic Titan.
Our criterion, therefore, whatever it is, must be immediate.
It can depend upon no theory, no postulate, no complicated
vision of things. It must deal, in other words, with the
simplest, ultimate facts of consciousness.
a. The second indispensable requisite of a criterion is that
it must be intrinsic to the knowing process. Our knowledge,
if it is of any value, must have within itself some means of
discussing its own validity. No appeal to the will or feeling


234 REALITY AND TRUTH
or common sense or faith of individuals or communities can
avail as an ultimate test of truth. If a criterion were sought
in the will, for instance, we should require a "theory of will"
to support "the theory of knowledge ". Once again an ever-
widening, never-ending vision of labour would open before our
gaze. Frankly, we prefer not to figure as competitors of
Sisyphus.
Moreover, even if, "per impossibile," we completed our
task, the labour would all have been in vain. One cannot
hope to discuss the validity of knowledge by something which
is not knowledge; any more than we can hope to reason con-
structively with our senses, or to feel with our intelligence.
Briefly, it is impossible to discover truth, to discuss the identi-
ties or conforrhitiereitheirbT objects or of thoughts by means
of sometbing which has nothing to do with either. The test
I of knowledge, the criterion of truth, must be intrinsic to the
knowing process. To attempt to measure the accuracy of our
'knowledge by means of our strivings or desires, or by means of
some feeling of pleasure or exultation that may accompany a
given train of thought, is to measure knowledge by what is not
knowledge, or in other words to seek an extrinsic criterion.
The knowledge, indeed, may be accurate, but the test, as such,
is worthless. One cannot measure the surface of the earth in
gallons, nor a volume of water in acres. The standard of
measurement must ever be homogeneous with the thing measured.
3. The criterion of truth, whatever it be, cannot be sub-
jective in the sense of being the property of one individual, or
the peculiarity of some small group of men. It must be some-
thing common to all men, and peculiar to none; something *■
which for want of a better word we style trans-subjective\ The
epithet "objective" has often been chosen to designate this
third requirement of a criterion, but we cannot deem the choice
happy. Truth always implies a relation, either of object to
object, via a mind, or of thought to thought—we use " thought"
in the wide sense of any representation in consciousness—
within a mind. "Objective" truth, therefore, in the sense of


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 235
something independent of any mind, is simply non-existent. -
Now the test of truth cannot be more " objective" than truth
itself. We cannot therefore expect to find a rigid "objective"
reality by which to measure the accuracy of our knowledge.
On the other hand, truth cannot be the prerogative or privilege
of any one person, or of any esoteric group. The criterion, in
other words, must be trans-sribjective. Truth must be im-
personal.
A criterion, therefore, to sum up sharply, must be immediate,
intrinsic, and trans-subjective.
We may glance for a moment at the third note of trans-
subjectivity, to see how many of the hopeful criteria of the
philosophers are rendered inadmissible by our analytical con-
siderations.
Trans-subjectivity the Breaker of Systems.
As subjectivity must at all costs be avoided, we cannot seek
our criterion in the more changeable, fluctuating, "personal"
elements in consciousness, nor in those complexes which
involve the play of our more variable functions. The cri-
terion, that is, must be found among the stable functions of con-
sciousness which we all share, and which to that extent are
trans-subjective. Now two of the most changeable functions of
consciousness are feeling and will. Neither they, nor their
complexes, therefore, can be the criteria of truth.
Of all the events that come and go in the stream of con-
sciousness, feelings are the least stable. As they change with
perplexing irregularity from hour to hour, and often enough
from one minute to another, they give, as it were, an ever-
changing colour-background to all our thoughts and desires.
Thus for ever oscillating both in intensity and kind within the
consciousness of any one individual, they do not find any neces-
sary counterpart in the mind of another. Our feelings are our
peculiar property, so subjective as to serve almost as a definition
of that unfortunate term. No play of feeling, no exalted appeal
to any "Geistes-Gefiihl" like that of Jacobi, can therefore be


236 REALITY AND TRUTH
allowed in the ultimate test of truth. Feelings like " intuitions"
may give rise to suspicions, or even to inspiring assumptions.
They ought not to convince, for the^cannot_pioKe.
From feeling we turn for a moment to will. By our will,
we mean a particular psychological function which is capable
of two and only two typical manifestations, in desire and de-
light. The desire is the "urge" of the will, the tendency to
strive after some object or ideal, just as delight is the reaction
which we experience on its attainment. In passing, probably
much of our human story, with its tragic and comic elements,
can be summarized in the formula that our power of desire is
far more intense than our power of delight. Vehement desires
are pursued with a strange pertinacity, and lead at last to what
is often but a pale fulfilment. In any case, desire is eminently
a personal affair. The ambitions, strivings, loves, hates, aspira-
tions, all the "lust of the will" to live and expand, are the
inalienable property of my own soul. They may be shared in
part by some others, of my own nation, class, profession; but
the part that is shared will find its way into a new constellation.
The emphasis will be changed.
There are indeed a few desires shared by all men, such, for
instance, as the longing for a state of supreme, unfailing happi-
ness; but the ordinary series of our desires varies at not in-
frequent intervals in any one individual, and shows the most
surprising differences, both in intensity and direction between
any two persons taken at random.
Delight, moreover, which follows in the wake of desire,
shares all its strange variability. Thus, by desire or delight,
or what comes to the same, by an act of the will, it is im-
possible to solve the problem of truth. It would at best lead
us by a tortuous, unreasonable path, to a subjective certitude,
which might or might not be valid. Struck with the note of
subjectivity, it could never lead us to establish a trans-sub-
jective, impersonal truth.
No belief, therefore, of any kind, whether it be in the
Kantian postulates of the practical reason, or in some authority


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 237
like that of de Lammenais, or in the traditions of men, like
that of Roger Bacon, de Bonald, and the rest, can be used to
solve the ultimate problems of knowledge. Belief always im-
plies an act of the will, of desire or delight, and neither of
these personal factors can lead us infallibly to a truth that may
be apprehended by all men. Belief must be based upon
knowledge, and not knowledge upon belief.
Neither feeling nor will, therefore, should be used to test
the truth of anything; nor, be it noted, should any of their
complexes. Such a complex, for instance, would be found in
the robust common sense of the human race, which has been
erected into a criterion by not a few philosophers, to be
held devoutly by many men as the ultimate test of truth.
"Common sense " is too confused, too unwieldy, too unsteady
an instrument of measurement. In the making of the com-
mon-sense views of men, in the framing, that is, of a theory
of life and conduct, their wills and feelings play a not incon-
siderable part. They judge so often by results, and by the
feelings and reactions which the results provoke. Where feeling
and will enter into the framing of a test, that test must cease
to be sufficiently trans-subjective to be a criterion of truth.
Similarly it is impossible to appeal to " the satisfaction of the
whole man " as the touchstone of validity. One "whole man"
varies extraordinarily from another, and what would satisfy one
would leave another cold and unmoved. Briefly, the "whole
man" includes a gamut of feelings and desires, which are not,
and cannot be trans-subjective. Thus, none of the complexes
of will and feeling can be pressed into our service. Once
again, by taking a different path, we come to our former con-
clusion that only within the realm of knowledge itself can the
criterion of truth be found.
Evidence the Criterion of Truth.
What, then, is the criterion which satisfies the triple require-
ment of being immediate, in the sense of dealing with the
simplest ultimate facts of consciousness, impersonal or trans-


238 REALITY AND TRUTH
subjective, and intrinsic? The criterion is evidence, the evidence,
clearly, of our cognitive processes of intellect and sense. The
whole trend of our discussion has brought us to this important
conclusion. In presence of objects, I have representations by
the dual processes of sensation and intellect. If I take
sufficient care, and obey the necessary conditions, I can, as we
have shown, be indubitably certain of the validity of those
representations, of the accuracy of my knowledge. That
knowledge, both sensorial and intellectual, dealing with the
properties and nature of the objects of experience, -gives me a
certain amount of evidence. That evidence, collected, sifted,
and applied, is the only test by which I can judge the validity
or truth of propositions. Truth always applies a relation,
either of object to object, via the mind of an observer, or of
thought to thought within his mind. The criterion for the
supposed identity or conformity can be alone sought in the
evidence, which sense and intellect place at our disposal.
I assert, for instance, the identity of two objects, one of my
present, the other of my past experience, in saying, "this is a
true or real diamond ". How can that identity be tested, or
in other words, what is the criterion of its truth? What in-
deed but the immediate evidence of my sensations? If my
concept of diamond be a valid representation of the stone—if
it be invalid, the result is due to my own carelessness—and
if my immediate sensations, here and now, reveal the charac-
teristic properties of the diamond, and the response to the
ordinary tests, then I may be certain that the stone is a true
diamond. The test of my certitude, and of the truth of the
statement lies in the one criterion of evidence.
Similarly, we may apply the test to the truth of propositions,
that "Cambridge is due north of London" or "mahogany is
red" or that "two and two are four ". I have only to take the
evidence of sense and intellect, and to see if one representation
includes the other, or if one term of the proposition is con-
formable to the other.
Let us take the least promising of the three propositions,


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH ^ 239
to wit, "two and two are four". Mathematical unity never
existed on land or sea, any more than the dreams of geometers
really exist. Still I have a definite concept of unity which is
an "abstract" and not a general term, derived by the mental
process of abstraction. By two I mean 1 + 1. By four I
mean 1 + 1 + 1 + 1. The immediate evidence of the mean-
ing of my concepts reveals the truth of the original statement.
To say that there may be a world where two and two make
five, is to assert pontifically that there may be a world where
"four" is called "five". We might add that there may be
a world where two and two make "flonkin," to coin a new
term. All we know immediately, however, is that if the people
of that world mean what we mean by "two," then " flonkin"
means what we call "four ". If it does not, then the arith-
metical powers of that people are beneath contempt.
The process of securing valid knowledge, and of collecting,
sifting, purifying the data of sense and intellect, is painfully
slow and laborious. No mystical criterion of intuition is of any
avail, nor can we help ourselves forward by the apparent
"clearness and distinctness " of any statement or contention.
We possess only one primary, ultimate criterion—evidence.
That criterion is immediate: it deals with the simplest ultimate
facts of consciousness, sense-data, and concepts. It is trans-
subjective: there is nothing personal in our purified state-
ments of sense-impressions and concepts. Such statements
are as trans-subjective and impersonal as the principle of
causality on which they pivot. Lastly, it is intrinsic to the
knowing process, seeing that the evidence is drawn from in-
tellect and sense. The criterion of evidence thus obeys the
triple indispensable condition of a valid test of truth.
Our criterion is no talisman, no charm. It presents no
element of ease or of suddenness. It is merely the final sum-
mary of our whole outlook on the theory of knowledge. From
first to last it rests for all its cogency upon our treatment of
the validity of knowledge, which in turn depended upon our
proof of the existence of a real world. That proof represented


240 REALITY AND TRUTH
the synthesis of all our early findings, concerning the existence
of conscious states, and the search-principle of causality. Thus
from the moment we set out to cast suspicion, it might be,
on the first principles and the causal law and found our task
beyond the range of human possibility, we have been pre-
paring to make this one statement. The only sure guide in
the maze of things, the ultimate criterion of all truth, is evi-
dence.
What, then, is to be said of the other criteria that have
been offered in such abundance? With all deference to the
philosophers, who have laboured often with much skill in the
application of their tests, we would maintain that evidence is
the one and only ultimate test of truth. In so far, therefore,
that their conceptions have involved the collection and
manipulation of data, they have been near to us, at least in
spirit. In so far, however, as they have wandered outside the
domain of knowledge in search of a criterion such as intuition,
they have unfortunately laboured in vain.
Secondary Criteria.
Apart, however, from the one final standard of evidence,
there are a multitude of secondary criteria of great value and
importance, which have been brought to light in contemporary
systems. It is not always possible to collect all the relevant
data, nor to articulate the parts into one whole. Life is short,
and many propositions are not of sufficient importance for
thought or action to warrant so great an expenditure of labour.
In order, therefore, to keep ourselves "afloat on the stream of
experience," it is well to have secondary criteria. We cannot
"document" every statement, analyse every theory, nor inquire
into the evidence of every fact. The secondary criteria will
enable us to adapt ourselves, suitably, pending the final appeal
to evidence.
Among those criteria, we may mention that of the Pragma-
tists and Humanists, which is found in the general adaptability
of a supposed truth to life and action. If any belief consoli-


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 241
dates our thought, interprets our experience, and inspires us
to live and act with greater ease and happiness, we may say
that there is strong presumption in favour of its truth. Simi-
larly, we might mention the criterion of the great Idealist
school,' which is sought in coherence and comprehensiveness.
If no internal discrepancy can be found in a given proposition,
and if it allows itself to be integrated with ease into a fuller
and more inclusive system, there is a strong a priori assumption
in favour of its truth. Briefly, if the absence of contradiction
shows that a belief is possible, and if its power to synthesize
the varying elements of experience is sufficiently comprehensive,
that belief is probably true. For ordinary life, and as a first
test of philosophic tenets, probably nothing more valuable
has ever been suggested than this joint criterion of consistency
and comprehensiveness.
Thus it would be possible to show that a large number
of diverse epistemologies may be utilized by us all in the
"court of first instance," where those opinions are formed
which are to keep us in touch with life and thought. These
secondary criteria, one by one, however, lead us to an inspiring
assumption, a high probability, a strong presumption, and not
to an irrefragable certitude. To establish those identities or
conformities, which we style truth, so that they shall be beyond
all cavil and question, there is only one means at our disposal—
the method of evidence. The secondary criteria are tests of
probability: the primary criterion is the test of truth.
Evidence the Criterion of Certitude.
At the opening of this chapter we considered the nature of
certitude, and found that it had no separate criterion of its
own; that the test for our valid certitudes was exactly the same
as our test for truth. We may now see that evidence is the
only ultimate criterion of them both. Certitudes, whether
intrinsic or extrinsic, whether, that is to say, they make appeal
to immediate data, or rely upon some motive of credibility in
the knowledge or experience of another, may all be tested by
16


242 REALITY AND TRUTH
evidence. An intrinsic certitude, expressed in a judgment,
will obviously be examined in exactly the same way as a sup-
posed truth. Are the identities or conformities, which are
asserted, borne out by a scrutiny of the facts? That is the
only relevant question.
Similarly, an extrinsic certitude must be scrutinized with
even more care: for in this case, we are committing ourselves
to an unverified and sometimes to an unverifiable statement.
We should be most exacting in our examination of the motives
of credibility in the particular witness or authority. If the
statement is of any importance, for individuals or men, we
must review all the known facts as to the authority in question,
scrutinizing his credentials with an eye for every unpleasant
possibility. If our last question is answered satisfactorily and
our last doubt silenced, we can only apply one further test.
We may sometimes check the reliability of the witness by the
secondary criteria of consistency, comprehensiveness, and
adaptability to life and thought . Briefly, an extrinsic certitude,
depending upon our belief in some authority, can only be
controlled by the extrinsic evidence of his credibility and not
by a satisfying intrinsic review of the facts on which the state-
ment rests. If, however, our review of this extrinsic evidence
excludes all reasonable doubt as to the credibility and relia-
bility of the authority, we may possess our extrinsic certitudes
in all fearlessness with the fulness of human conviction.
What Part is Played by the Will?
But what part does the will play in the making of our
certitudes? "As your theory stands," a critic may say, "it
looks almost despairingly intellectual. Intellect, no doubt, is
the pioneer, but cannot the will play some important part?
Habitually in ordinary life, the will seems to do a great deal
of the grappling and holding of our convictions. We think
with a purpose, and the purpose is declared by the will. Why,
then, is the will so mercilessly excluded? Such unrestrained
intellectualism is almost inhuman."


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH a43
Our reply, though brief, must be carefuL The will cannot
make or unmake truths: it ought not, therefore, to make or
unmake convictions. People, of course, often solve questions
by an act of the will; often prove things that they wish to
prove; often settle their certitudes by their desires. The fact
cannot be denied, but it only shows the prevalence of caprice
and wilfulness. What have our desires to do with the nature
or qualities of things, or with the truth of the propositions
concerning them? We desire, it may be, to defend some
theory, to justify some cause, to cast suspicion upon some
opponent, to crush some adversary. All these desires may be
eminently good. They ought not, however, to play a part
in the collection or sifting of any evidence. In the search for
impersonal, trans-subjective truth, they are not only irrelevant
but harmful.
These tend to distort the mind, to vitiate our judgments,
to lead us into the most insidious and prevalent fallacy of
emphasis; in a word, to make partisans and advocates instead
of philosophers. We serve the cause we have chosen rather
than the cause of truth. Under the stress of our desire, we
begin to pick and choose our facts, and to be content with
those which seem to support our claim. If our unpleasant
fact cannot be denied, we " interpret" it, whittle or explain it
away. We begin to care nothing for principles. In so far as
they help us, we refer to them with deference and even en-
thusiasm. Nothing is of any value which does not immedi-
ately serve our turn. However lofty our motive, however
excellent our claim, we use what have been well called "the
natural defences of error and the significant emblems of a bad
cause ". Desires, if allowed to play any part, are too insistent,
too masterful. They twist and turn, bend and break.
Yet, in spite of all, our wills are indispensable in the pro-
secution and attainment of truth and certainty. They must
"steady" our minds, and direct our thought; aid, in other
words, in the joint work of attention and concentration. For
the rest, one desire is required of us, to wit, the desire to sup-
16*


244 REALITY AND TRUTH
press all prejudices and prepossessions, all " predetermined aims
and foregone conclusions "—the good-will to search for truth.
There must be no filling in the gaps in our evidence by an act
of the will, no "urge" of the will out beyond the frontiers of
the ascertained truth. Nietzsche speaks somewhere of "the
lust of the will to procreate and grow ". The will can indeed
procreate. Its child, however, is Desire and not Truth.
The rdle of the will in all our certitudes, whether extrinsic
or intrinsic—whether we scrutinize the credibility of an
authority, or the credibility of some proposition—is important,
though wholly subordinate. It may aid in the necessary work
of attention and concentration; for the rest its only desire
should be not to defend but to inquire, not to support a claim
but to discover the impersonal truth.
In our discussion of certitude and truth, we have presented
our readers with no "Pisgah-Sights,'' no great vision of the
world from some Mount of Illumination. There is no criterion
known to us whereby we may justify Browning's mighty
vision:—
Over the ball of it,
Peering and prying
How I see all of it,
Life there outlying.
Roughness and smoothness
Shine and Defilement,
Grace and uncouthness
One reconcilement. . . .
Our Criterion, that of the Natural Sciences.
Our duty has been to deliver no inspiring message, but to
suggest a painful, laborious process whereby truth may be at-
tained. Truth, that shall prove irrefragable, is our untiring
quest in philosophy, and to secure our truths we need a
criterion. We have suggested the unfailing criterion of evi-
dence. Historians, physicists, biologists, ethnologists, in fact
all who pursue the study of natural science or history in any
of their myriad branches, as well as the lawyers, have long


CERTITUDE AND TRUTH 245
since adopted this ultimate test to which we make appeal.
Philosophers, often enough neglecting evidence, have sought
their tests elsewhere. The sciences that have clung to the
cause of evidence as their only guide, have progressed with
giant strides within the last few centuries. Philosophy, during
the same period, has progressed but little. Philosophers show
lamentably little unanimity on questions of principle and
method, and little enough on questions of ultimate fact. The
appearance of a new system of life and thought, of a totally
new vision of men and things, is no more surprising to us now
than the publication of a new book of verse. Philosophy, a
thing of oscillations and revolutions, has fallen on evil days.
The stream of wisdom is losing itself in the sands. And the
reason? Among many reasons, there is one of paramount im-
portance. Philosophers have too often abandoned evidence
as the one, ultimate, saving criterion of certitude and truth.


CHAPTER XI.
THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDOE.
We opened our inquiry with the statement of five insistent
questions. With the discovery of a suitable criterion, and a
definition of truth, we have answered the fourth and fifth.
Our task approaches its appointed end. Before we pass,
however, to bind together our results in one last chapter on the
possibility of science and philosophy, we must turn to consider
the philosophy of Kant, who, in many ways, is the most formid-
able opponent of our whole vision of the theory of knowledge.
Presumably little excuse is needed for offering a brief state-
ment of the Kantian system. Indeed it is almost impossible
for anyone to touch the real problems of truth and knowledge
without measuring his thought with that of the German philo-
sopher. Of all the Moderns who have debated the nature and
scope of our knowledge, its machinery, limitations, and validity,
none has attempted so systematic, so keen an analysis. More-
over, none has so profoundly impressed the thought of future
generations, of laymen, as well as the professional philoso-
phers, who grapple with epistemological problems. The "Cri-
tique of the Pure Reason " has been echoed in the schools, and
we might almost say in the market places. It has coloured
the minds of those who least agree with its author. It is ac-
countable for a deep vein of Agnosticism as to the nature of
ultimate reality, and of Scepticism as to the constructive power
of reason. The buoyant thought of the Greeks, their con-
structive reasoning, their daring speculation is no longer ours.
In so many of the modern codes, reason seems crippled and
bent if not broken; condemned as in the " Critique of the Pure
246


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 247
Reason," to the mere articulation of phenomena. The havoc
wrought by Kant is almost immeasurable. We must endeavour,
therefore, to understand his system before we contrast it with
our own critical realism.
Now apart from occasional subtleties, from an extravagant
and barbarous terminology which here and there might well
baffle the most pertinacious effort even at paraphrase, and from
a few unsolved contradictions, the thought of Kant in its gaunt
outline is clear. We might even suggest that it is refreshingly
clear, compared with the work of the Idealists, who followed in
his track, remodelling his thought, and rendering much both
intangible and obscure. We shall, therefore, set out a summary
of Kant's " Critique of the Pure Reason," which is nothing more
than his theory of knowledge pursued in all its metaphysical
consequences. Our only effort will be to interpret his thought
with care and precision in our own language.
Experience for Kant a Union of one Variable and
one Constant.
The main idea, running through the whole Critique, may be
given as follows. The raw material, unmodelled, confused,
chaotic, of experience is given in sensation, to which our whole
experience from first to last is bound and chained. The whole
reduction to order, the unifying, moulding, finishing, pointing
of this raw material—"stoff"—is effected by certain mental
processes which are not derived in any way from "experience ".
On the contrary these processes, which together with the
sensuous "manifold"give us our "experience," are the spon-
taneous, natural assertions of our mind in the effort to unify,
consolidate, and systematize the chaotic manifold of purely
sensuous experience.
All our perceptions, all our separate experiences of objects,
are thus functions of one variable and of one constant. The
variable is the stuff of sensation, which, in all its disorderliness,
would be nothing but a "Gewiihl " or buzzing confusion, but
which, of course, as mere raw unintelligible stuff is never


2 48 REALITY AND TRUTH
grasped in consciousness. The constant of our experience is
the mental equipment of what Kant styled the a priori Forms
and Categories. The forms are the intuitions of Space and
Time, and the categories are not the "predicamenta " or classi-
fications of reality of the old Aristotelean metaphysic, but
"pradicabilia" or our spontaneous ways of thinking about
things. These terms will need further unravelling. For the
moment their main function is perfectly clear. They render
what would otherwise be an unintelligible confused mass of
"perishing existences" into an orderly intelligible whole,
related to other elements of our experience.
If we were merely sensitive creatures "a Gewiihl or chaos of
appearances would fill our minds without giving rise to any
distinct apprehension of objects, such as we mean by the term
experience".1 Dr. Caird in his valuable "Philosophy of
Kant," after giving the above quotation, appends an extract
from one of Kant's letters to Dr. Herz. There Kant says that
without the play of mind, of these a priori processes "all the
data of sense would give me no idea of objects, nay, would not
even enable me to attain to that unity of consciousness which
is necessary for the knowledge of myself as an object of inner
sense. I should not be capable even of knowing that I have
these sensations, and consequently for me, as an intelligent
being, they would be nothing at all. It is true that if I make
myself in thought into a mere animal, I can conceive these
sensible ideas as carrying on their regular play in my soul, . . .
and so having influence on feeling and desire . . . but then I
should not through these ideas have knowledge of anything,
even of my own state."2 Experience, therefore, is as we said
a function of one variable, the raw material of sensuous im-
pressions, and of one constant, the human a priori equipment,
Kant turns away from the Variable to the Constant.
With this firm conviction that our minds themselves play
by far the largest and most important, indeed the determining
i " Deduction " (igt edition), Part II, § 4.
"Dr. Caird, " Philosophy of Kant," p. 266.


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 249
part in all our experience—in all our knowledge, whatever it
be, of the world that lies outside us—it was not strange that
Kant should have turned from considering the variable to the
constant. His theory of knowledge thus transforms itself
into an exhaustive study of our a priori equipment, its validity
and limitations. If all knowledge involves a set of constant,
determining elements, which, though they be grouped differ-
ently, do not themselves change, it is clear that nothing could
be more wise than to recoil once and for all from the
old study of the " real world " to examine the human mind in
its constant operations.
Change, as such, interests neither scientist nor philosopher.
Each endeavours to discover changes that recur, to find some
cyclic order of variability, in a word, to study constancy in
and through change. The constant, throughout the whole
amazing flux of human experience, was found by Kant in these
mental Forms and Categories. To them he turned to solve
the problems of knowledge, and in so doing, effected his
"Copernican Revolution " in philosophy. Knowledge instead
of revolving about reality, was now made to revolve about the
human mind. The facts, limitations, and validity of knowledge
were to be studied by an analysis of the minds of men, and
not in the light of some relation existing between minds and
the world of real things.
The centre of interest and of importance was thus trans-
ferred in his system from the outside world to the field of
human consciousness. In a word, his revolution, which like
many another wrought much havoc, consisted in turning our
thoughts inward instead of outward in the effort to discern
the validity and possible extension of human knowledge. At
the close of the first book of the "Transcendental Analytic''—
could any choice of terms be more inhuman or more forbid-
ding ?—Kant himself says: "However exaggerated, therefore,
and absurd it may sound, that the understanding is itself the
source of the laws of nature, and of its formal unity, such a
statement is nevertheless correct and in accordance with ex-


aso REALITY AND TRUTH
perience. It is quite true, no doubt, that empirical laws as
such, cannot derive their origin from the pure understanding.
. . . But all empirical laws are only particular determinations
of the pure laws of the understanding, under which and
according to which the former become possible. . . ."1 "The
understanding itself is the source of the laws of nature,"
might well have been the watchword, the Carmagnole, and
Marseillaise of Kant's Revolution in philosophy.
So much for a first glimpse at the Critique. The thought
which we have tried to convey will become clearer as we pro-
ceed with the details of the system. Let us, then, concentrate
our attention on the Kantian inventory of our mental processes,
of our a priori equipment.
Kant's Inventory of our Constant Mental Equipment,
Our sense-impressions of themselves, yield us a manifold, an
ungrouped, irregular, unstructural mass of impressions, utterly
meaningless, and bewildering in their multiplicity. If we en-
joyed this sensible experience alone, if, that is, the manifold
was not "informed" by the mind, our consciousness would
be dazed—a prey to an indescribably wild jumble of things,
which would course through consciousness without giving us
the least information about anything. Now this manifold is
reduced to unity and given a definite coherent structure by
the spontaneous operations of the mind. At the moment of
receiving what would otherwise be a bewildering chaos of
impressions, we assert the mental Forms and Categories, thus
reducing them to coherence and order. These mental pro-
cesses are utterly independent of experience for their origin.
They are not deduced from sensible experience—how could
they be?—nor from anything else. They are, therefore,
styled a priori. They collaborate with the matter of sensation
in the formation of all our knowledge: that is all.
Now the whole of our natural a priori equipment was di-
vided into the two sensible Intuitions of Space and Time, and
1 Max Muller's "Kant's Critique of the Pure Reason," p. m.


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 251
the Categories, which by the most mechanical means—Kant
had something of a "clockwork" mind—are discovered to
number twelve.
These Categories, the abstract forms or processes, which
mould experience into an intelligible synthesis or unit are as
follows. Each of the members of the conventional division
of judgments into those of quantity, quality, relation and
modality supplies us with three.
Quantity
Quality
Relation
Modality
(1) Unity
(1) Reality
(1) Substance and
(1) Possibility-Im-
Accident
possibility
(2) Plurality
(2) Negation
(2) Cause and
(2) Existence-Non-
Effect
existence
(3) Totality
(3) Limitation
(3) Action and
(3) Necessity-Con'
Re-action
tingency
Of the four types of judgment which Kant here strains to
yield a uniform triple subdivision, Dr. Wallace in his racy
little commentary says: "In the first class of judgments the
point emphasized is the numerical extent to which the predicate
is applicable to the subject; in the second, whether it belongs
to it in any way or not at all; in the third, whether the
assertion is made off-hand or with a condition and an option;
in the fourth, whether the proposition is asserted, merely sug-
gested, or authoritatively imposed ".1
Like all technical classifications the list of the a priori
intuitions and categories is rather terrifying until we see how
they are used. Let us take a simple instance. I watch a
train passing along the metal track. My whole experience
may be summed up in saying that I observe a loose group of
things, engine, carriages, trucks, forming one artificial whole,
which occupies successive positions with regard to surrounding
objects, in successive moments. There is "the experience ".
What are the elements of which it is composed? By sense
alone, the matter of sensation, I was given an incoherent
jumble of impressions. The Intuition of Space collaborates
with this matter, "informing" it, preparing the way for the
1 Wallace, " Kant," p. 167.


25* REALITY AND TRUTH
real unification of the multifarious parts of the experience, by
my understanding. Thus space is the "Form" of outer ex-
perience, just as time is the " Form" of inner experience. The
Intuition of Time collaborates, like that of Space, with the
sense manifold, at the moment of experience. When the
original "jumble " has thus been "spaced " and "timed," we
are in a position to grasp the place of the train in relation to
surrounding objects, and to give this vision of engine, carriages,
and trucks, a place in the flow of conscious events.
The " Forms " of Space and Time, or "a priori intuitions of
sensibility," thus afford the possibility of that unity, of that syn-
thesis of factors into one whole, which we style "experience ".
Before that "experience" can be achieved, however, the
operation of these intuitions needs to be supplemented by that
of the intellect or understanding. Thus, by a concomitant
application of two of the categories of quantity at the moment
of my vision of the train, I perceived that the object was both
many in kind, and one in function—or as we say, more simply,
that many carriages were made up into one train. Similarly,
I may apply the category of causality, and judge that the
motion of the whole thing along the metal track which I
observe in its successive positions, is due to a series of ex-
plosions in the engine. Other categories might equally well
play a part in the final synthesis, the "whole" experience.
Naturally the whole operation which Kant here analyses into
its constituent factors is performed with all possible immediacy
and rapidity. It is only the unravelling of what passes in the
twinkling of an eye that seems heavy and cumbersome—not
to say intricate.
Thus it will be seen that the underived a priori Forms
of Space and Time, asserted at the moment of experience,
begin the work of reducing the chaotic manifold to order.
The final orderly synthesis cannot, however, be effected with-
out the application of certain categories. By the co-operation
of the "manifold" and the Intuitions of Space and Time, I am
given a sensation indeed, but a mere sensation, an instantaneous


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 253
isolated event in consciousness. A whole series of these
sensations, such as I might have in presence of a moving
engine, would be a series of single, isolated occurrences each
"blindly self-centred ".
Our sensorial consciousness apart, from the work of "un-
derstanding," would thus yield us a "mere series of pulses,
each pulse being unaware of the others ".1 As Kant said,
"Thoughts without contents are empty, intuitions without
concepts are blind",2 The single "instants" of sensation
are thus brought together by the play of mind, and welded
into one compact, structural, intelligible whole. What would
be a mere "jumble" is made into a series, and what would
be a mere series is made into a synthetic unit of experience.
That constitutes the victory of knowledge. Similarly, moving
not upward but downward, we see that every synthetic unit is
made up of "Space and Time " elements, which, in turn, look
for their matter to the chaotic manifold of sense. The vic-
tory of the "synthetic unity" must be achieved over the manifold
of sense. That constitutes, not the victory, but the limitation
of knowledge.
In our experience, something is systematized, articulated,
correlated: that something is, and, said Kant, must be the
sensuous manifold. The constant, the a priori equipment of
the mind, is simply destined to constitute "unities, orders,
sequences, identities" out of the variable, the raw material
of sensation. With that its function begins and ends. We
shall return to this point later.
So far, at least, in this inventory of processes at which we
have taken a glance, there is no great difficulty. Once realize
the mechanical habit of mind of the German philosopher, his
tendency to cleave two inseparable things in twain and all is
easy. Keep sensation perfectly free from anything in the
.nature of order or coherence, and the rest runs with all the
smoothness of a "barbara" syllogism.
Now let us see the particular angle from which Kant viewed
lDr. Wallace, "Kant," p. 165. >M. Miiller, op. cit. p. 45.


254 REALITY AND TRUTH
the theory of knowledge before passing to review the "justifica-
tion" of these intuitions and synthetic processes. Up to the
present, we have nothing but an inventory or classification, and
it will be obvious to every one that these mental processes,
which are responsible for the whole constitution of our experi-
ence, are in urgent need of justification. One may even have
a suspicion from the very beginning that the task will prove
extremely difficult, if not impossible. To justify knowledge
which is shown to depend upon the outside world, we have
found by no means an obvious or easy task. To justify spon-
taneous operations of the mind which dominate, without being'
derived from, experience, might well seem a hopeless quest.
However, we must not anticipate. Let us first see how Kant
viewed the theory of knowledge.
Kant's Vision of the Variable and the Constant.
Centuries ago Greek philosophers put the harassing problem
of knowledge in all its fulness. They had contrasted the
particular contingent "facts" of which we are aware on sense-
perception with the "universal" concepts which we find in
our thought. How, they asked, was it possible that the uni-
versal should be related to the particular, or better still, how
was it that a concept at once "universal," and as they some-
times held " necessary," should have any connection, however
extrinsic with the world of things, which were by their nature
both particular and contingent? There lies, at least, one of the
problems of knowledge in all its appearance of glaring and
irreconcilable contradiction.
Now one of the notable restatements of the old difficulty
without any of the old Greek penetration is to be found in
the works of Hume, whose thought left an unfading impression
on the mind of Kant. Indeed Hume may be justly said to
have provided the starting-point of the "Critique of the Pure
Reason ". Hume had analysed the contents of consciousness
into "impressions" and "ideas ". These and their complexes
exhausted for him the contents of consciousness. Under


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 255
"impressions," he includes "all our lively perceptions, pas-
sions, emotions ". "Ideas," on the other hand, are the faint
images of impressions in thinking or reasoning, or of ante-
cedent ideas. Seeing that "ideas" are only copies of im-
pressions, it follows that consciousness contained for Hume
only one irreducible element—the impression. Those impres-
sions he divided into sensations and emotions. Briefly for the
Scotch philosopher, the raw material of all knowledge was
given in sensation and emotion. By sensation we grasp what is
particular and contingent. All our knowledge, therefore, in so
far as it dealt with real things, was for Hume particular and
contingent. Yet we do actually discover laws which we regard,
at least, as universal and necessary.
What explanation of this did Hume vouchsafe? Only that
experience stores up memories, and memories generate expecta-
tions or beliefs. We form connections by experience; and
proceed to anticipate the future by formulating a general law
which reveals just a touching belief in uniformity. In other
words, Hume said that there was no means of justifying the
supposed universality and necessity of any law dealing with
matters of fact. How, indeed, could he hope to justify this
universality, if all knowledge were reduced to sensation?
How form a judgment of universal application out of elements
which are sealed with every mark of distinctness, contingency,
and particularity?
Against this doctrine, which if taken in sober seriousness,
ruins the possibility alike of science and philosophy—indeed
of anything but a museum-like collection and classification
of phenomena to which might be added a number of unveri-
fied "beliefs"—Kant reacted, while admitting a sufficiently
dangerous amount of Hume's strange and almost perverse
philosophy. Kant seems to have been even obsessed by the
problem, as to how we could ever know or justify a universal
law. How obtain a universal law from a particular case or
group of particulars? This seems to be the question which
Hume had set throbbing in his mind, and which drove him to


256 REALITY AND TRUTH
his "Copernican Revolution". But the question was not new.
It was only a modern version of the old Greek difficulty.
The Famous a priori Knowledge.
Kant discusses the question in the preface and introduction
to the second edition of his "Critique ". With good reason he
saw that sciences like mathematics and physics existed, and that
in these sciences men had codified certain laws which were
both "universal" in the sphere of their application and
"necessary" in the sense that none could think of them
reasonably and deny their validity. Thus knowledge at once
"universal" and "necessary " undoubtedly existed, and Kant
set himself to discover "how " and " why ".
Following in the trail of Hume, he next asserted that "ex-
perience" could never give us secure, "absolute," knowledge
of this type. "Experience" for him was necessarily an affair
of particular events or acts which, even if collected by the
thousand, can never enable us to move outside the charmed
circle of particularity. A fact is a particular fact, and a hun-
dred facts give us a hundred particulars and nothing more.
Thus knowledge of the kind which is valuable in science and
philosophy—knowledge at once "universal " and "necessary"
without which our sciences would be mere collections of phen-
omena—could not, he held, possibly be derived from experi-
ence. It must be something asserted by the mind itself at the
moment of experience, a concomitant, that is, and not a
derivative. In other words, the secure basis of this know-
ledge, which is the very heart and life of our scientific and
philosophic syntheses, is to be sought in our a priori equip-
ment, in the natural operation of our mental Forms and
Categories.
What particularized "experience" could never yield, the
mind itself would grant us by its own native and spontaneous
operations. This "knowledge a priori "—let there be no
doubt on this point—is spoken of by Kant "as absolutely in-
dependent of all experience, and not merely of this or that


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 257
experience ".1 A page or so later, we read the statement of
the theory which we have just summarized. "Experience
teaches us that something is so or so, but not that it can-
not be different. First, then, if we have a proposition which
is thought, together with its necessity, we have a judgment
a priori. . . . Secondly, experience never imparts to its judg-
ments true or strict but only assumed or relative universality
(by means of induction), so that we ought always to say, there
is no exception to this or that rule, so far as we have hitherto
observed. If therefore a judgment is thought with strict uni-
versality, so that no exception is admitted as possible, it is not
derived from experience, but valid absolutely, a priori. . . .
Necessity therefore and a strict universality are safe criteria of
knowledge a priori and are inseparable one from the other. " *
The Famous Synthetic a priori Judgments.
We now turn to take a glance at Kant's general classifica-
tion of all judgments, in which he sharpens and points this
theory of our a priori knowledge. To begin with, he divided
all judgments into those which are analytic, and those which
are synthetic. The synthetic variety was further sub-divided:
they were either a priori or a posteriori. One sometimes
wonders if Kant would not have been left gasping, had he not
found the terms a priori and "transcendental "—both of which
are singularly infelicitous—in which to conceal his simple
straightforward meaning. For the moment, however, we are
not criticizing, but only expounding.
To his classification of judgments Kant as usual gave old
names and new meanings. An analytic judgment, for him, was
a merely explanatory judgment in which the predicate is con-
tained and implied in the subject. A synthetic judgment, on
the other hand, is ODe which extends and expands our know-
ledge; one in which the predicate, while not being contained
1 Introduction (2nd edition), " Critique," Mfiller, vol. i. p. 399.
1 Italics our own. Kant, "Critique," Introduction (2nd edition),
Muller, op. cit. p. 400.
17


258 REALITY AND TRUTH
in the subject, is somehow connected with it. Thus if I say,
"all bodies are extended," I make an analytic judgment, for
"extension" is contained in my concept of body. There is
no need to look abroad to verify it: the predicate can be
"unpacked" from the subject. But if I say, "all bodies are
heavy," I make a synthetic judgment, the concept "heavy"
not being included in the concept of bodies. The heaviness
of bodies, which I predicate, represents an addition to my
knowledge, and the consequent judgment is synthetic.
The synthetic judgments are either a priori or a posteriori.
Once again the idea is simple. All empirical judgments are
synthetic, and since they depend upon experience are a pos-
teriori. Thus if I say "Antwerp is a port" or "silver has
lustre," I make synthetic judgments, embodying some particular
fact of experience. All the ordinary judgments we make in
amassing the facts or data of the particular sciences are of this
variety. Lastly there are the synthetic a priori judgments,
which play such an enormous part in the Kantian Critique.
First, such judgments are strictly synthetic: unlike analytic
propositions, therefore no amount of examination of their sub-
jects will reveal the corresponding predicates. Next, they are
a priori. They do not depend upon experience, nor flow from
it. They are not contingent nor particular, but necessary and
universal. They are the judgments that the mind with its
a priori equipment is capable of making. Thus mathematics,
physics, and metaphysics are shown to be constituted of synthetic
a priori judgments. A specimen or two may be given. In
physics we say that the quantity of matter in the universe al-
ways remains unchanged. Such a proposition conveys the idea
of necessity, and is clearly not analytic. It is therefore a
synthetic a priori judgment, according to the German philoso-
pher. Similarly, the principle of causality is found to belong
to this same group. Such a statement "that all which hap-
pens has its cause" is universal and necessary, and therefore
a priori, according to the Kantian canon. It is, moreover,
synthetic. One might clearly analyse the idea of "all that


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 259
happens " from now until the end of time without being able
to extract the idea of cause. The principle of causality, like
the principles in physics and the simplest judgments in mathe-
matics, is then described as a synthetic a priori judgment.
It is now possible to give Kant's answer to the question
that Hume had set without solving. How, in effect, can we
whose experience is bound up with particular and contingent
events discover laws or principles that are universal and neces-
sary? According to Hume the principle of causality, for in-
stance, stated in any universal or necessary sense, was a mere
"delusion of reason". Kant says of Hume that "if he
had grasped our problem in all its universality, he would never
have thought of an assertion which destroys all pure philo-
sophy. . . ." Hume had forgotten the existence of synthetic
a priori judgments, which, utterly and completely independent
of all experience, gained from the spontaneous operation of our
minds their characteristics of universality and necessity. In
other words, we, whose experience is indeed bound up with
particular and contingent events, enjoy a knowledge of principles
and laws, which are both universal and necessary, not by any
collection of particular facts nor by any manipulation of ex-
perience, but by certain universalizing and necessitating pro-
cesses of our very minds themselves. Such at least is the
strange doctrine of Kant, which makes the whole construction
of all real science and all philosophy depend upon the famous
synthetic a priori judgments.
The Kantian Defence of our Mental Equipment.
So far, then, we have given a brief sketch of Kant's inventory
of our mental processes, and of his vision, of the origin of the
all-important " universal and necessary judgments ". Now we
turn to his justification of these a priori forms and categories,
and, to be quite frank, the defence is lamentably "thin".
Let us observe that we stand in urgent need of a two-fold
justification, first of the existence, and secondly of the applica-
tion of this purely mental equipment to the objects of our ex-
i7 * -.


260 REALITY AND TRUTH
perience. Kant gives his defence in the famous "Deduction
of the Categories," which of all the Critique is the most be-
wildering section. The deduction is not a deduction, in any
ordinary sense, nor is the defence a real justification. Both,
as some one slily said, are eminently "transcendental ".
Dr. Caird, in setting out Kant's problem at this point,
writes illuminatingly as follows: "Experience is always, even
to the ordinary consciousness a system—a system it may be,
only in its most general outlines, but still so far systematic.
Even when the sense of law and order is most defective,
common experience is to this extent organized, that all objects
are represented as existing in one space . . .; and all events
are represented as taking place in one time. . . . Further,
while the unity of space and time is thus presupposed as con-
ditioning all the objects of experience, on the other hand, pre-
supposition is also made, tacitly if not explicitly, of the identity
of the self which is the subject of it. Anyone may see this if
he will only attempt to make the contrary supposition—that
the self to which all his experiences are referred does not con-
tinue the same. It is evident that, in that case, there would
be a complete break of connection between the two successive
series of experiences, which were referred to the two different
selves, and that no bridge could be thrown from the one to
the other. . . . The identity of the self is, in fact, but the
subjective counterpart of the unity of the world as one whole,
existing in one space and one time. . . . The problem, there-
fore, on this side of it, is to determine what a merely sensitive
being needs to convert a series of sensations into such a conscious-
ness of the world as we actually possess."l What the sensitive
being needs for this purpose are the a priori categories, which
are thus, according to the German philosopher, triumphantly
vindicated.
Apart from technicalities Kant's thought may be expressed
as follows. Every object of our experience is grasped as a
synthetic "unit" within an orderly whole. It is not given to
1 Caird, op. cit. p. 333 et seq. Italics (last sentence) our own.


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 261
the human mind to apprehend any one thing without reducing
it to unity and order; nor can we apprehend many things,
however dissimilar, at one and the same time, without setting
up some link, however extrinsic, between them, at least for the
moment of " apperception ". If I look at the trees of a forest,
I group them together as "many," forming a whole, within
the world of experience. If I concentrate on one particular
tree, I think of it as "one," within an organized whole. In
either case the object of my experience must be a systematized
unity. This was styled by Kant the "Synthetic Unity of Ap-
perception," without which my consciousness would be nothing
but a scene of confusion, a disorderly meaningless mass of
fleeting impressions.
Now the categories perform this unifying function: their
work is to unify, systematize, and to consolidate. They there-
fore justify themselves by doing precisely what the human
mind requires. To sum up briefly, the principle of the
Synthetic Unity of Apperception demands that the elements
of our knowledge should be bbund together into structural,
orderly units. The categories fulfil the task of unification.
They are therefore vindicated—the justification apparently aris-
ing from the necessity of the case, and the nature of the
human mind. Like the a priori Intuitions of Space and
Time, therefore, the Categories are shown to be indispensable
conditions of experience.
To many it will appear, when the thought of Kant has been
stripped of all its ambiguities and high-sounding phrases, that
the a priori equipment is " justified " because the mind happens
to work that way. We had thought that philosophers endea-
voured to criticize and justify the operations of the human
mind—above all, to discover reasons for their supposed
validity. Kant's "criticism," when all is said and done, is
slight. According to him, the whole of the "universality"
and "necessity" of certain judgments, of the laws of physics
and of the principles of philosophy springs from the intimate
structure of the mind. That intimate structure is justified be-


262 REALITY AND TRUTH
cause—well, because!—the mind works that way, and on the
whole seems adequate to its own requirements. All told, it
is a simple solution.
The Limits of Valid Knowledge.
"Le revers de la medaille," however, shows the severest
possible limitation of knowledge. The categories that can
build structural "experience" units out of the manifold of
sense, can do nothing else. To the manifold of sense our
thought is therefore inexorably bound. As Dr. Wallace says:
"The two factors of knowledge (the manifold and the a priori
equipment) restrict and modify each other. Within the range
of experience, the senses impose their limitation upon the wide
but vacant forms of pure thought, and any employment of
thought apart from its modification by sense is declared to be
illegitimate. We only know quantity in the sensible shape of
number, and causality in the sensible shape of sequence."1
But the words of Kant himself are even more significant, when
he suggests that the cause of speculative reason is utterly
broken. "... The greatest and perhaps the sole use of all
philosophy of pure reason," he says, "is, after all, merely
negative, since it serves not as an organon for the enlargement
(of knowledge), but as a discipline for its limitation; and in-
stead of discovering truth, has only the modest merit of
preventing error."2
One might almost append to this extract Hume's famous,
dashing condemnation of constructive metaphysic. "...
When we run over libraries, persuaded of these principles,
what havoc must we make! If we take in our hand any
volume of divinity or school metaphysics, for instance, let us
ask, does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity
or number? No. Does it contain any experimental reason-
ing concerning matter of fact and existence? No. Commit
it, then, to the flames; for it contains nothing but sophistry
and illusion."8
1 Wallace, " Kant," p. 178. *" Kritik," ed. Hartenstein, p. 256.
'Hume, " Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding," sect. xii.


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 263
The Great Renunciation.
Kant's reason for making "the Great Renunciation" runs
as follows:—
The whole "justification" of our a priori processes, of the
operations of our understanding and our mode of thought,
turns on their ability to co-ordinate the "stuff" that is given
us in the manifold of sense. They co-ordinate and give us
"experience" which is purely and wholly phenomenal. Be-
yond "phenomena" we can never go. Seeing that our
mental powers are limited to the grouping of our phenomenal
sensorial experience, we can never by any chance push our
analysis into the nature of things; into the noumena, which
"lie behind " the phenomena. It is useless, therefore, to try
to "get at "a material world, which would "cause" our im-
pressions, or even to "get at" a personal self which sets up
our trains of thought. Neither the outside material noumenon,
nor the inner personal self are phenomena, and we are tied,
hand and foot, thought and sense, to the phenomenal order.
To "get at" these ultimate realities we should require "to
step out of consciousness at both ends,"—which we cannot do
—and then even if brought "face to face" with these new
realities, or noumena, we should require, before grasping them,
some new "noumenal" instruments of knowledge, which we
do not possess. Our cognitive instruments are all phenomenal.
We have no mental equipment capable of grappling with the
problems of ultimate reality. The influence of Hume is
obvious. We are simply faced with the Humian scepticism
as to the whole constructive play of reason: only Hume's
theory has been given a certain amount of "stiffening " with
regard to the range and character of our phenomenal know-
ledge.
The whole theory leads to a condemnation of speculative
work of reason, and incidentally to the ruin of the cause
of philosophy. When once the human understanding has
played its part in grouping and synthesizing the elements
of our phenomenal knowledge, the reason, as Kant saw, steps


264 REALITY AND TRUTH
in and endeavours to consolidate still further, by penetrating
to the ultimate causes of things. Our dream is even to grasp
things in terms of their ultimate constitutive principles and
causes, and our reason unfailingly attempts to fulfil the
dream. There is thus ever an "urge" of reason out beyond
all phenomena. We seek an unconditioned absolute basis
for all the phenomena that are known to us. We endeavour
indefatigably to track all our experience back to realities,
which as such have never by any chance fallen within our
experience.
In three distinct ways, said Kant, the reason attempts to
prosecute its hopeless task. It seeks an unconditioned per-
manent basis or background for all the internal fleeting facts
of consciousness in some enduring reality, styled a soul. The
unconditioned basis of all phenomena, which are related to
things outside us, is sought in a group of substantial realities
or " things-in-themselves "—in an extramental world of persons
and things. And lastly, the unconditioned basis of all, of
everything that is, of the soul and of the totality of things, is
sought in God. The reason cannot rest in phenomena: it is
"outward bound ": it gives rise in us to these three "Ideen,"
of the soul, the world, and God.
The reason thus sets up " ideal" solutions of three problems,
one psychological, is there a soul? one cosmological, is there a
real world of noumena? one theological, is there a God, the
unifying source of all the diversities of existence and opera-
tion? Such ideas are eminently useful, and even necessary.
They express the mind's obligation to unify all the details of
experience. They are the "limit" towards which all the
hundred lines of our experience tend to converge, but as such
"the ideas" can never be reached, never proven. If we try
to prove them we involve ourselves hopelessly in "paralog-
isms" and antinomies; we move in circles and prove con-
tradictories.
How indeed could it be otherwise for Kant? We have
only phenomenal experience, from which certain collaborating


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 265
a priori Intuitions and Categories can be extracted and
isolated. But their range of application is limited to the
phenomena, to the manipulation and systematization of the
sense-manifold. If we attempt to prove a soul or the exist-
ence of God,—noumena, be it noted, and not phenomena,—
we strain our cognitive instruments, which in consequence
play us false by working up spurious syllogisms and proving
contradictory propositions. Thus, to quote Kant's fourth
"antinomy," we can prove :—
1. "There exists an absolutely necessary Being, belonging
to the world either as a part or as the cause of it."
3. "There nowhere exists an absolutely necessary Being,
either within or without the world, as the cause of it."
And the reason? Obviously any "proof" of a necessary
Being would depend upon the principle of causality, which
Kant held to be just one of many synthetic a priori judgments.
That principle, like all else that is a priori, is valid for "experi-
ence," but once pushed beyond the range of phenomena, who
shall say? How apply it outside of the fields of human ex-
perience to a necessary Being? No! our reason can only,,
suggest inspiring " Ideen " which it cannot possibly help us to
prove. Beyond the frontiers of phenomenal experience of the
ordinary things of space and time, we can never move with
any security. Above all there is no guarantee, once beyond
those frontiers, that we are not wandering hopelessly. We
have no compass, no chart, no maps, no sense of direction, no
knowledge of sun, moon, or stars, that can help us in the
strange noumenal world that lies beyond our ken. All the
supposed "proofs " that we erect in that noumenal world are
scientifically impossible—indeed worthless. We have styled »
this doctrine " the Great Renunciation ".
Reason a Sentry and a Policeman.
Yet in the Kantian code the reason had one other very im-
portant function. Admitting our own incapacity to scan the
nature of ultimate reality, we are convinced immediately that


266 REALITY AND TRUTH
no other reason can have any better fortune, once it wanders
out beyond the confines of space and time. This "proven"
incapacity of our reason may therefore shatter at a blow, or
rather explode from the very foundations, every philosophy
which pretends to discuss the inmost nature of things by
speculative arguments. Our reason, therefore, has one great
"regulative" duty,—to police the fields of the supra-sensible.
It must prevent all trespass in those fields by speculative
thought, which, apparently is something of a tramp and vaga-
bond. It may thus prevent any intrusion into philosophy,
either of those who affirm or of those who deny by speculative
proofs the immortality of the soul, or the existence of God.
As Kant said: ". . . There is no room for real polemic in
the sphere of pure reason. Both parties beat the air and fight
with their own shadows, because they go beyond the limits of
nature where there is nothing they can lay hold of with their
dogmatic grasp. They may fight to their heart's content; the
shadows which they are cleaving grow together again in one
moment, like the heroes in Valhalla, to rejoice anew in their
bloodless contests."l
Metaphysic, in other words, could no longer be the natural
foundation of religious belief or of ethics, though, on the
other hand, it could not destroy any belief. The old "science
of being" is thus, in Hume's violent phrase, "committed to
the flames" as so much "sophistry and illusion". Meta-
physic might declare the invisibility and inaccessibility of ulti-
mate reality to the speculative reason. That is all. Around
the world of reality, where our hopes and longings are stored,
there is thus placed by Kant's very criticism of the scope
of human reason, a sort of "Magic Defence," "a Bulwark
of Invisibility," so that "the sword of the sceptic and the
battering-ram of the materialist fall harmless on vacuity".
The speculative reason, in thus "policing" the fields of the
supra-sensible, might keep the way open for the practical
1 Kant," Critique, Discipline of Pure Reason," Translation, Miiller, op.
cit. vol. ii. p. 648 (one or two changes).


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 267
reason. For according to the German philosopher, where the-
Speculative Reason fails, the Practical Reason succeeds. It
solves the "real" problems, or at least those that are neces-
sary for life and religion, by an act of faith in certain postu-
lates—ultimately by an effort of the will in the presence of
certain almost overmastering facts.
Practical Reason to the Rescue.
So far we have given some synoptic account marred by the
absence of all detail of the "Critique of the Pure Reason ". In
the succeeding "Critique of the Practical Reason," Kant gave
his system of ethics, which he had already expounded in his
"Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals". We may sug-
gest the main outline of his thought very briefly, in order to
realize the success of the Practical Reason, in coping with the
otherwise inaccessible world of noumena or ultimate realities.
As far as the Speculative Reason is concerned those realities
enjoy, as Jacobi said, a significant "otium cum dignitate ".
For Kant the principle of morality must exclude all material,*
sensuous, egotistic motives. All these are reducible to the
desire for personal gratification or happiness, which according
to the immediate testimony of our conscience, is, in this
strangely inhuman system, declared to be directly opposed to
the principle of morality. That principle for him rang
challenging forth in the command, "Act so that the maxim
of thy will can at the same time be accepted as the principle
of a universal legislation ". In this typical command, which
he calls also the " Fundamental Law of the Practical Reason,"
reason issues its decree to our sensible desires to follow the
laws of the moral code. This principle or law is promulgated
within us by the minatory, imperative, categorical "voice" of
conscience, which issues its succinct unequivocal orders.
There is nothing of exhortation, nothing of a maxim of prud-
ence, nothing of a council of perfection in this solemn "Cate-
gorical Imperative": it is unconditional, decreeing simply
"do this," "avoid that". In this Categorical Imperative, man


268 REALITY AND TRUTH
in his character as a rational nature, a noumenon or "thing-
in-itself," gives laws to himself as a sensuous being or pheno-
menon.
Through the unconditioned imperious decree of conscience,
Kant found a way into the heart of reality. Just as the "Cri-
tique of the Pure Reason " shows the disciple of Hume, so the
ethical code shows the son of a deeply religious, pietist mother.
The philosopher who had proved so exacting, so meticulous
in handling the speculative reason, and discussing its validity
and limitations, now yields easily enough to his ingrained desire
to find some rational basis for his belief in God, freedom and
immortality. The sceptic of the Speculative Reason becomes
the dogmatist of the Practical Reason.
God, Freedom, Immortality.
The Categorical Imperative on being analysed is found to
contain implicitly, under pain of being meaningless, the three
great postulates, to wit, the freedom of the will, the immortality
of the soul, the existence of God. These Kant styled, with his
usual "flair" for cumbersome, ugly phrases, "the Postulates of
the Pure Practical Reason ".
Briefly his thought runs as follows: What would be the
significance of the imperative judgment of conscience, if we
were not free to disobey its commands? The very existence
of a command, therefore, forces us to assume that "the
sensuous part of our being can be determined by the rational
part," in other words, that the will is free. So in the same
way the postulate of immortality flows from the same categorical
imperative. The moral law demands perfect conformity of
the will to the command of the Categorical Imperative, for no
other reason or motive than that the command is given.
Such complete "holiness" is never attained on this side of
death: we at best attain not to "holiness" but to virtue.
There is a constant tendency to mix our motives, to lapse from
our high calling which is to follow the Categorical Imperative
blindly, fully, obediently, and to allow some lower motive of


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 269
pleasure or happiness to play a determining part in our actions.
The Categorical Imperative which demands this perfect con-
formity of the human will, therefore presupposes an after life,
in which that conformity can gradually be attained. Briefly,
the Categorical Imperative demands the immortality of the
soul.
Lastly, the Categorical Imperative gives rise to the postulate
of God's existence. It commands and we are free to obey.
But this virtuous action of ours, which is performed without
any backward glance, without any reference to our pleasures
or desires, in simple obedience to this imperative "thou
shalt," does not necessarily lead to happiness. Virtue is not
its own reward, and the right ordering of things demands
that there should be complete harmony between moral worth
and happiness. The reward of virtue is not meted out in
this life, where sorrow is insistent and happiness a "will of
the wisp". That reward, expressive of the complete agree-
ment between morality and happiness, must be meted out in
the life into which we shall be ushered "by the throbbing
impulse we call Death ". Briefly, the Categorical Imperative
demands a supreme intelligence that shall establish the ulti-
mate harmony of morality and happiness, an infinite judge who
shall reward disinterested virtue, in a word—God.
Thus by a strange dogmatic legerdemain, Kant "unpacked"
all that he most desired and most needed from the imperative
dictum of conscience. His thought shows no trace of the
"Copernican Revolution," and little enough of critical acumen.
On the other hand, it reveals the well-known instinct, the
hurried reasoning, the uncritical, sweeping, onward rush of the
dogmatist. It is not our purpose, however, to delay over this
section of his philosophy. Suffice it to say that these three
mighty postulates were all supposed to flow from the very ex-
istence and nature of the Categorical Imperative. Those postu-
lates cannot be proven. Proof would involve the play of the
Speculative Reason, which is chained to the domain of pheno-
mena. The postulates deal with ultimate non-phenomenal


27o REALITY AND TRUTH
truths. They are therefore above and beyond proof. We thus
accept them by an act of faith; by an act of intelligence, that
is, dictated by the will in presence of commanding motives of
credibility. One cannot help hoping that Kant's theses are
better than his "proofs," that his beliefs are better than his
defence.
Summary and Conclusion.
With this brief summary we may close our review of Kant's
philosophy. From the numerous points of detail, from all the
distressing inhuman terminology, let his thought stand out in
high relief.
He begins his system by denying a real cognitive character"
to sensation. He proceeds to find the power of ordering
and systematizing these scattered, unintelligible fragments of
sense in the a priori mental processes, which do not and
cannot spring from "experience". So far from springing
from "experience" they form an integral part of experience
itself. As a necessary complement of the sensible manifold,
these mental processes can only be validly used to inform that
manifold "matter". They are incapable of helping us to
understand "things-in-themselves". Speculatively we may
never grasp the nature of ultimate reality. Speculatively we
cannot solve the great outstanding problems of God, freedom,
and immortality, which philosophers for centuries have re-
garded as their supreme task. The Speculative Reason,
acknowledging its failure, steps aside and makes a courteous
bow to the Practical Reason. The Practical Reason, in order to
safeguard the very existence of morality, establishes its postu-
lates, which it accepts by any act of faith. . . . For the rest
Kant's thought has been greeted with the applause of a whole
century of philosophers.
No philosopher ever dealt a more cruel blow to the human
reason than Kant . Sceptics, before the German philosopher,
had tilted at knowledge, had coined epigrams and had even
marshalled a small company of arguments. They had languidly


THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 271
expressed doubts, rejoiced in insurmountable difficulties, and
asked their old imperturbable questions. But Kant had done
more. He had given a careful, neatly articulated system
which led to the ruin of all philosophy. For if philosophy
cannot deal with ultimate problems; if all our search principles
and thoughts are applicable only to the realm of phenomena,
of sensations; if metaphysic, in the Aristotelean sense of "a
science of being," is impossible: then philosophy reduces itself
to a criticism of the limitation and validity of our phenomenal
knowledge.
Philosophers have understood the implications of the
"Critique of the Pure Reason" only too well. For a century
they have "danced around the Ancient Idol," the problem
of knowledge. In desperation they have sought emergency
solutions, and above all, emergency criteria. Real philosophic
construction has for the most part been stifled, and the ques-
tions of truth and knowledge have tended to recur at every
hand's turn, as though to bear witness to the mental strain
induced by these "anguishing" problems. Worse than all
else, the subtle Kantian scepticism has settled down over
many generations of philosophers. Even when they have
grown most categorical in their assertions, one feels the "sous-
entendu" that these theses are valid merely for the realm of
phenomena. Of reality who shall speak? All the daring
speculation, the 6lan, the solemn belief in the power of the
reason to cope with reality, to solve the mighty, basic prob-
lems of life and thought, in a word, all the vision of the
Greeks has departed.
As we read the "Critique of the Pure Reason," we almost
hear the bolting and barring of our prison doors. We see the
prison bars and hear all too clearly the "clank " of the heavy
chain. Apart from Heine's mad parallel between Kant and
Robespierre, there is not a little truth in his summary of
Kant's philosophy. "In truth," Heine wrote, "had the
citizens of Konigsberg divined the full meaning of this sub-
versive, world-bruising thought, they would have felt before


272 REALITY AND TRUTH
the man a far more gruesome awe than before an executioner
—an executioner who puts only men to death; but the good
people saw in him nothing but a professor of philosophy, and
when he strolled past at the appointed hour, they gave him
a courteous salute, and, it may be, set their watches by him."


CHAPTER XII.
THE KANTIAN THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE: A CRITICISM
AND A PARALLEL.
Now that we have stated Kant's theory of knowledge, we turn
to criticize it. From first to last our most important and most
destructive criticism of that epistemology lies in the fact that
it fails to achieve its object. It imposes the severest, and as
we hope to show, most unnecessary restrictions on our play of
thought and our speculative capacity, and then fails even to
justify our supposed knowledge of a purely phenomenal char-
acter. While, therefore, we are by no means blind to the
keenness and accuracy of much of Kant's thought, to his
undoubted genius and sincerity, to his desire for a full and
impartial inquiry into the merits of our knowledge, we are
forced to add that his vindication and limitation of our human
knowledge are the one insufficient, the other unnecessary. Our
criticism is severe. It entails a condemnation, in the name of
ultimate facts and indubitable principles, of the whole "Coper-
nican Revolution ".
No Justification of the Mental Processes.
Let us for a moment grant the whole Kantian analysis of
our a priori mental equipment into the Intuitions of Space
and Time and the twelve " Categories ". To say that the mind
works in this particular way, by an interplay of these several
processes is one thing: to show the validity of those processes
is quite another. To remark that we are bound to synthesize
the elements of our knowledge into units, under pain of turning
the fields of consciousness into a wilderness of "perishing
273 18


274 REALITY AND TRUTH
existences " and sporadic impressions, is an interesting obser-
vation. To add that the a priori Forms and Categories effect
these unities out of the chaotic manifold of sense is still more
interesting. But to conclude that the whole range of these
a priori processes is thereby vindicated, is a strange non sequi-
tur. They build synthetic units: yes. But are the syntheses
correct? Are the units of experience properly built? The
question itself shows that here we touch the essential weakness
of the Kantian system. It lacks anything like a criterion. In
spite of all its elaborate apparatus, it provides nothing where-'
with to distinguish valid knowledge from its opposite.
The person who suffers from illusions or even hallucinations
builds units, moreover synthetic units, out of his " experience ".
Is it necessary to add that in such a case the whole structure
is perverse, the use of the principle of causality wholly indefen-
sible? The power of a thought to build up a unit of experience
out of a chaos of impressions, does not necessarily imply its
truth or validity. Equally well, the power of Kant's a priori
Forms and Categories to build structural wholes of our experi-
ence, cannot of itself solve the problem of their validity. What
we require is not a mere statement that the human mind works
spontaneously in these ways. We are on the track of some
permanent and basic reason why the mind must operate in
these ways, and why the operation is justified.
The case of the man in an asylum who lives and dies
convinced that he is the great Napoleon should never be
forgotten. His consciousness is not in the very least a dis-
tracted wilderness nor a prey to a wild jumble of impressions.
He forms units of experience by the hundred, construes the
stooping of a servant into an act of homage, the delivery of
a letter as a "coup d'etat". Everything in his life is read in
terms of his central and insistent conviction, and everything
at the same time is strangely even wildly misunderstood.
Worse than all else the whole metamorphosis, which cuts this
pseudo-Napoleon off from the race of men, is due, psychologi-
cally, to an a priori conviction—Intuition, Form, Category,


KNOWLEDGE: CRITICISM AND A PARALLEL 275
what you will—which is "wholly independent of experience "!
The Kantian Forms and Categories even though they build.
"experience " units are obviously in urgent need of justification.
No Justification of these a priori Processes is even
Possible.
Now if those processes are a priori, no justification is possible.-
We have already found it difficult enough to justify mental pro-
cesses which depend upon experience. But what can be said
of Kant's a priori equipment of Intuitions and Categories?
They are, a priori, independent of all experience, concomitants,
as we have said, and not derivatives. As Kant himself de-
clared they are supplied by our own faculty of knowledge,
"a supplement" to the raw material of our sensuous impres-
sions. If, therefore, they are really a priori, concomitants, or
supplements of experience, how can their validity be discussed?
We might possibly show that the human mind naturally works
in these particular ways, but that, as we have seen, is no justi-
fication. Moreover, no appeal to a " consensus generis humani"
can be of any avail. If one mind can err, so may a dozen, a
hundred, and so may all, as we find often enough in the history
of physics and astronomy, before the real Copernican revolution.
Naturally we should be the last to deny that the discovery of
identities in the operations of many different minds may raise
a high probability in favour of their legitimacy. Unfortunately
probabilities are not our quest in epistemology: we are in
search, indeed on the track, of irrefragable certitudes which
alone can yield a solid foundation to all our knowledge.
Let us consider this point in a little more detail.
It will be remembered that Kant's mind has been rudely
"awakened" from its "dogmatic slumber" by the thought of
Hume. While not in the least following the Scotch philoso-
pher, in denying the possibility of universal judgments concern-
ing matters of fact, Kant had been challenged to justify their
existence. Whence the necessity, whence the universality of
certain judgments in mathematics, physics, and philosophy, in
18 •


276 REALITY AND TRUTH
face of the never-ending contingency and particularity of the
facts of life? Kant, as the result of a long inquiry, concludes
that those very characteristics of necessity and universality are
"totally independent of experience "; that they spring from the
universalizing and necessitating a priori processes of the mind,
which, it will be remembered, is "the source of the laws of
nature ". None saw more clearly than the professor of Konigs-
berg that the whole corpus of our knowledge, science, and philo-
sophy alike, depended upon these judgments which are sealed
with the strange marks of necessity and universality. So far his
analysis is admirable, his vision perfect. Our gravamen against
him is that his defence of these judgments is insufficient; that,
in consequence, our knowledge is not vindicated.
Philosophy, after all, seeks to interpret our experience fully
and systematically. Now judgments underived from experi-
ence, as for instance the principle of causality—we speak a
Kantian thing—cannot possibly help us to interpret or to
systematize, with any feeling of security, that experience. Before
that principle could be of any value to us, we should need to
be assured that this a priori work of our understanding was a
genuine presentation of the truth of things, or briefly that our
minds were constituted to grasp reality. Kant's philosophy can
give us no such assurance. Indeed it cuts off the very possibility
by affirming the unknowableness of reality. All these great a
priori judgments are an addition to experience, something over
and above, or at best a concomitant. They therefore cannot
possibly give us a valid or sufficient basis for universal and
necessary judgments about the facts of experience.
In setting up a whole series of a priori processes, and then ap-
plying them to the raw material of sense impressions to obtain
our phenomenal knowledge, Kant showed himself a real dog-
matist, in spite of all his protestation. He assumed, in other
words, that the mind was so constructed as to understand not
reality indeed but phenomena. Such an assumption is Dog-
matism. All he had a right to assert is that the mind makes -
up structural units of experience. The next question obviously


KNOWLEDGE: CRITICISM AND A PARALLEL 277
is, are the processes legitimate, or the "units" valid presenta-
tions? As we follow the "Critique of the Pure Reason"
through "Transcendental Deductions " and "Synthetic Unities
of Apperception," we are perhaps inclined to lose our way.
The simple fact remains. Kant did not answer the all-impor-
tant question.
We, for instance, found that it was impossible to doubt the
existence of a given number of certitudes in the mind. For
better or worse they cling like so many burrs. But we did
not hurriedly assume their validity, or affirm that the mind is
so constituted that it cannot fail to know justly. In other
words, throughout our theory of knowledge we have attempted
to be severely critical; we have allowed no dogmatist assump-
tion to shorten or to mar our inquiry from end to end. So
much for the insufficiency of the Kantian defence of the uni-
versality and necessity of the basic judgments of our knowledge.
Kant's a priori Refuge Unnecessary.
We now turn to our second point . Not only is the defence
insufficient: it is also unnecessary. It is not necessary, as
Kant thought, to have recourse to a priori processes in order
to defend the necessity and universality of certain principles or
judgments. Kant worked under the immediate influence, we
might almost say the immediate fear, of Hume's thorough-going
empiricism, with its attendant sceptical bias; and he put together
his "Critique of the Pure Reason" with all its revolutionary
procedure, in the desperate attempt to defend the possibility of
science. We who are thinking several generations later, har-
assed by no fear of Scepticism, may see other possible solu-
tions than the emergency-exit of a priori knowledge.
An extra-mental world of diverse realities exists.1 Those
realities act immediately upon our sense-organs, and mediately
upon our intellectual capacities, yielding the conscious events
known as sensations and thoughts. The thoughts are never
1 Cf. chaps, vi. and vii., " The Existence of a Real World " and " Our
Grasp of Reality ".


278 REALITY AND TRUTH
particular; the sensations are never "general" or "universal".
The two cognitive processes co-exist giving us knowledge in
the forms of thoughts which are communicable, and in the
form of sensations which remain and must remain our own
inalienable property. Now the plain truth is that the mind in
presence of the individual reality thinks in general terms: in
presence of the particular, as we sometimes say, it thinks the
universal. Intellectually we can never grasp the individual or^
particular as such.1 In presence of a grey silvery stone shot
with fire, the mind thinks " opal," and the thought expressed in
'the term "opal" is equally applicable to all stones of the same
kind that ever were or ever may be.
Nor need anyone be scandalized at this universalizing or
generalizing process of the mind which is miles removed from
anything a priori. Above all let none suggest that because of
this strange and exclusive bias in favour of general concepts,
the mind thinks of things in a way that is utterly different from
their reality. Face to face with a peak in the uplands, I think
"mountain," a concept which includes within its ample range
all the more elevated surfaces on the face of the earth. That is
the way my mind naturally works in its obstinate refusal to
grasp what is merely individual. Do I "deform" reality by
- these general concepts? Is there a gulf fixed between knowledge
and the scheme of things, in consequence, as has been asserted
again and again by those who adhere to the Platonic tradition?
It might seem that there was; but only if we neglect one small
fact of vast importance. // is of the nature of things to be
general, and not to be merely individual.
The nature of any real individual thing is not, or at least
need not be "sui generis". Things fall into classes and
families, genera, and species, which share identically the same
nature, in spite of multitudinous individual differences. There
is nothing in the nature of any one man which belongs ex-
clusively to him any more than to the thousand millions of
the human race. There is nothing in the nature of a diamond
1 Cf. chap, vii., " Our Grasp of Reality".


KNOWLEDGE: CRITICISM AND A PARALLEL 279
which belongs by prescriptive right to one particular piece of
crystallized carbon rather than any other. Thus the nature of
a real individual thing is general: it belongs to one indeed, but'
is shared by many.
Now the mind is so constructed, as we gathered in close
scrutiny, that it grasps the nature of things, mediately and
indirectly, gleaning its knowledge of what they are by what
they do. Thus the mind, in the act of grasping a nature,
which in point of simple fact is general, ought to think of it in
general terms. In seizing the real nature of the individual
thing, it comprehends it as a nature which is or may be shared
by many other members of the same class or species. The
mind, in other words, seizes the individual through its nature
which is general. What could be more simple or more
penetrating than this old Greek solution? Above all, what
could be more satisfactory seeing that every assertion at every
stage of the explanation may be proven by an appeal to facts
and indubitable principles?
Nothing a priori in the Conceptual Process.
Let it be noted, moreover, that there is nothing a priori in
this natural operation of the mind, in this universalizing pro-
cess. It is the typical reaction of the intellect to a stimulus »
from without, depending therefore directly and immediately
upon sensible experience—a posteriori, if one insists on this
ancient jargon, to the very hilt. All that the mind possesses l
apart from the data of experience is the capacity to react int
presence of those data.
In presence of individual realities, I think their general
nature in general terms, while I register their particular phe-
nomena in particularized sense-impressions. Both processes
are stimulated from without—products of experience. In pre-
sence of individual realities, I abstract some quality, which being .
general is recorded in a term, lacking all particularity. Once
again the process is wholly dependent upon experience, a


28o REALITY AND TRUTH
derivative and not a concomitant. By these means I am in
possession of a vast number of abstract and general terms,
which I permute and combine in judgments, or between which
I discover similarities or differences by various reasoning
processes. These are the three standard operations of intellect
—conception, judgment, reasoning. By reasoning I manipulate
judgments, by judgments I manipulate concepts. From first
to last my intellectual operations depend entirely upon concepts,
which are drawn from experience, and which are never by any
chance a priori. The very universalizing process of our minds
records our experience that things are not all different, nor all
isolated, however individual they may be: they fall in groups,
which all possess the same specific nature.
Seeing therefore that the human mind naturally universalizes
what it grasps, and moreover universalizes legitimately, it is
clear that it may form universal judgments in presence of
evidence of sufficient weight. Having once seized the fact
that it is of the nature of material things to be extended, the
mind may formulate the judgment, that "all material things
are extended". At once we find ourselves in presence of a
typical proposition which is both universal and necessary. We
shall later consider the general question of the validity of the
inductive process. For the moment without raising the whole
thorny problem of induction, we may see how it is possible,
owing to our indirect knowledge of the nature of things, to
formulate judgments that shall be as "universal " as the very
nature of the things themselves.
We scrutinize facts: we amass evidence: we grasp what is
common to many natures in any one object: we seize the uni-
versal aspects of things and record them in universal pro-
positions: we say that "all things are extended," that "all
things attract one another directly as the masses and inversely
as the square of the distance," and so on for the typical
judgments of the sciences. And the justification? It has
already been given at some length in our chapter on the
"Validity of our Knowledge ". And the Criterion? What


KNOWLEDGE: CRITICISM AND A PARALLEL 281
could it be but evidence, a posteriori to the last degree, which
alone can give us a test of truth?
Kant's recoil therefore from experience—a thing, for him, of
scattered "facts," of "perishing existences," of contingent par-
ticular events—and his refuge in the a priori domain of Forms
and Categories, was by no means necessary in order to defend
the possibility of universal judgments. The sciences and
philosophy can vindicate the most far-reaching of all their
judgments and principles by an appeal to the facts of experi-
ence. Kant's procedure is therefore unnecessary. We have
already shown that it is insufficient. The two epithets be-
tween them spell the ruin of the most ambitious system of
philosophy.
The Great Renunciation made in Error.
So far we have discussed, and dismissed as unsatisfactory, the
supposed Kantian vindication of knowledge. After the vindica-
tion came the vision of our limitation, which is equally unten-
able. Convinced as he was that the a priori processes could
form synthetic units out of the manifold of sense, Kant per-
suaded himself, in some strange way, that this was their only
possible function. Thought was thus bound to the mere
articulation of phenomena. It might weld together what could
otherwise be the scattered fragments of sensation: that is all.
The Categories, if thought of by themselves, were nothing
more than "Forms of possible experience," anticipations of
their own application to the sensorial mass of events. Never
by any chance could they help us to pierce beyond the range
of phenomena.
Kulpe giving his synopsis of Kant's position on this point
writes: "Der Verstand kann nur die Form einer m6glichen
Erfahrung antizipieren. . . . Somit darf der Verstand die
Schranken der Sinnlichkeit nie uberschreiten ..." but adds
quickly, "... Dann aber liegt hier abermals eine ganz dog-
matische Erklarung vor: Der Verstand antizipiert die Mog-
lichkeiten seiner Anwendung auf Erscheinungen. Dass diese


282 REALITY AND TRUTH
Mflglichkeiten seiner Anwendung nur in dera sinnlich Gege-
benen oder dem Anschaulichen bestehen, wird dadurch
schlechterdings nicht dargetan."1
Now that is precisely our point: the limitation is "schlecht-
erdings nicht dargetan," absolutely unproven. Even granted
the Kantian idea that thought can form units of experience,
why can our thought necessarily do nothing more? Why is
the human mind incapable of "playing" on the facts of our
experience, in order to discuss their constitutive principles and
causes? Presumably Kant could answer, because all these
mental processes are the a priori spontaneous operations of the
mind, which are destined uniquely to "inform " and systematize
the "st off" of sensation. We observe that the reason given is
only a reiteration of the original thesis, and once again we
chronicle a typical assumption of Kant the dogmatist. Thus
the severest limitation that has ever been imposed upon our
thought in our search for ultimate truth and reality, is the
outcome of an assumption.
The Roots of the Error.
Let us glance at the bases of this assumption. We have
already suggested that Kant's a priori processes do not really
exist. There is nothing in the mind which is not generated
or at least stimulated by something from without. All that the
mind possesses, apart from the data of experience, is the power
to react in presence of those data. There is no concept, what-
ever it be, whether it be space or time, unity or plurality, which
cannot be explained in terms of experience. As we discovered
long since,2 the starting-point of the whole train of psycholog-
ical events is to be found in sense-perception. We have in-
deed two kinds of knowledge, the one sensorial, the other
intellectual, which differ from one another in scope and
reference. The fact remains that without sense-impressions,
our intellect would remain unstimulated, inactive, sterile.
1 Kfilpe, " Immanuel Kant," II Auflage, pp. 93 and 94.
8 Chap, vi,, " The Existence of a Real World ".


KNOWLEDGE: CRITICISM AND A PARALLEL 283
There is no concept, therefore, which results from the spon-
taneous operation of the mind. There are no innate ideas, nor
innate judgments or principles. There is no ordinary judg-
ment—we prescind from a few immediate indemonstrable pro-
positions which must be treated by doubt and denial—that
can escape the test of evidence. There is one ultimate
criterion of truth, to wit, evidence derived from immediate
experience. Briefly our whole mental output is not a priori
but a posteriori; not the result of spontaneous operations of
the mind, but of immanent processes stimulated by extra-
mental realities; not an "addition "or "supplement" to ex-
perience, but an integral part of the experience-process; not a
concomitant, but a derivative.
With this assertion of the a posteriori nature of our thoughts
and judgments—the proof lies in the whole constructive work
of this essay — we break at one bound through the whole
charmed circle of merely phenomenal knowledge. If our prin-
ciples and typical judgments of relation, quality, quantity,
and causality are all the spontaneous assertions of our mind,
it is clear that they cannot be used to discuss reality. But if,
on the other hand, these principles and judgments are not in
the least spontaneous nor a priori, but rather the natural reac-
tions of the mind to the stimulus of an extra-mental reality;
then at least the way lies open to show that our knowledge is
not exclusively bound to phenomena.
The Summary of Critical Realism.
Now the whole of our essay, in so far as it turns on this
point of momentous importance, may be summarized in the
following statements:—
1. There exists an extra-mental real world of persons and
things.
2. That this real world acts upon our cognitive capacities,
yielding sensations and thoughts.
3. That in consequence we have knowledge—however


284 REALITY AND TRUTH
mediate and indirect it may be—of the real world: that we
are not bound to the merely phenomenal order.
It would be interesting to trace these statements through
the various branches of philosophic speculation, and to show,
for instance, that the thoughts of space and time are really the
reactions of the universalizing human mind to the stimulus
of material reality. That reality is found to be both extended
and changeful. Space is our way of grasping the extension
of the whole world of matter: time our way of measuring
its changes. Let the indication suffice. To discuss the
question further we should need to penetrate into the domain
of physics and cosmology, and, however regretfully, we must
postpone that work for a later volume. We must take up
the question on broader and more general lines in the present
essay.
Let us remind ourselves of the nature of our knowledge
of reality, in order to measure our difference from Kant.
All our knowledge, of whatsoever kind, is a posteriori.
That is the great central fact. For the rest we need only
gather together our former results. Our sensations translate
for us the qualities that inhere in things. They translate
them, moreover, into a new language. That the language
even must be new is obvious. Knowledge which is psycho-
logical cannot be identical in all respects with reality which
is physical. The translation, however, if properly grasped—
if we lay aside the dictionary of the plain realist—is in every
sense satisfactory. By what we find within our consciousness,
we know, first, of the existence, and secondly, indirectly of
the nature of the reality that lies beyond.
Now the qualities, whose effects we register in consciousness,
do not merely inhere in the reality, like so many quills stuck
in a porcupine. We must free ourselves from all such tyrant
imagery. The qualities of things are their connatural mani-
festations or activities; appearances which, in very deed, re-
veal the nature. They even serve to define the nature. A
person is defined as a being of a rational nature. By the


KNOWLEDGE: CRITICISM AND A PARALLEL 285
characteristic mark of intellect, one typical manifestation, we
define a person. And so of all other things. Gold is defined
as a metal, which can resist heat, moisture, and the action
of the most corrosive agents, and so forth. Once again the
nature of gold is manifested in its permanent qualities. In
other words, the nature of things which is relatively stable and
fixed is shown to us in their unchanging, permanent mani-
festations—determinations, properties, qualities, accidents, call
them what you will—which are translated for us in the ord-
inary forms of knowledge. Our knowledge of the nature of
things, therefore, however slight and however indirect, is none
the less very real. By conscious processes we know of the
qualities, and by the qualities we discern and even define the
nature. By what things do, we know what they are.
Kant the Specialist in Dichotomy.
Here, then, in this series of considerations, we touch one
great and far-reaching difference between our critical realism
and the theory of Kant. Kant had a passion for dichotomies.
Witness his cleavage of the Speculative from the Practical
reason, of a priori from empirical knowledge, of faith from
reason, and now of noumena from phenomena. In his system
noumena or realities, and phenomena or appearance are
locked in incommunicable compartments. Of noumena we
by the speculative intellect could know nothing; of pheno-
mena by the interplay of a priori processes and the "stuff"
of sensation, we could know a multitude of things.
We an the other hand, by the pressure of facts, have been
led to see that noumena and phenomena cannot be cut off from
one another, without doing violence to both. There is no chasm
fixed between reality and its manifestations. On the contrary,
the noumenon is manifested in the phenomenon which thus
gives us a true, though indirect understanding of the noumenon
from which it springs. The nature is known by the mani-
festation, the person by his reason, the metal by its properties,
the tree by its fruits. The whole difference between ourselves


286 REALITY AND TRUTH
and Kant may be summed up in the words "men do not
gather grapes from thorns, nor figs from thistles"; that we
judge rightly of the nature of things by the activities which
they manifest.
It is useless to lament that we do not know things "as they
are" "in themselves"—whatever the phrases may mean.
Such expressions seem to reveal a desire to take a physical
reality and "dissolve " it in the mind until some kind of inter-
penetration had been effected—a desire for the old represen-
tative particles of Democritus, which were thought to stream
through the senses. If we want to find inner representatives
of outer reality, let us remember, not Democritus but Aristotle;
we require to "impound" no external matter, nor need any ac-
tivity "migrate " from the reality to the knowing person. The
person contains within himself the principles of activity of all
things that he can know.1 "17 i/'vx^ T* 0vTa *"* t'°-T"' travra.''
Naturally our knowledge of the reality of things is indirect:
it could not be otherwise. Indirect though it be, it allows
of much scope for the play of reason about the constitu-
tive principles, causes, and nature of ultimate reality. Kant
cut the "noumena" off from their "phenomena," and then
locked the noumena—the whole scheme of reality and all the
questions that most interest the human mind—in some in-
accessible and impenetrable region. He did a bad service to
philosophy.
Kant's False Theory of Causality.
We may now pass from a broad critique of Kant's outlook,
to a consideration of one detail of extraordinary importance—
the principle of causality. Incidentally there are a number of
ways of gaining a rapid view of any philosophic system. One
is to turn to the section dealing with the "origin of ideas," by
which the whole system in all its ramifications may be judged.
Another way is to scrutinize the defence of the principle of
causality by which the Humes, Kants, and Aristotles of the
1 " The Nature and Scope of our Knowledge," chap. ix.


_ KNOWLEDGE: CRITICISM AND A PARALLEL 287
history of philosophy can be separated from one another im-
mediately. The treatment of the principle of causality in
fact is one of the most delicate points in any system of thought.
And the reason is not far to seek. A philosopher endeavours
to understand things in terms of their efficient, formal, material,
and final causes. To work at all in realizing his dream he
must be able to use the principle of causality without fear of
contradiction. If this principle be not indefectible, further if
it be not both indubitable and undeniable, then neither the
philosopher nor his philosophy has any "raison d'etre ". If this
causal law be interfered with however slightly, we lose the only
instrument by which we can penetrate beyond the immediate
data of the sciences. Knowledge in that case becomes a long
register of facts connected together by "ands " and "buts".
Now Kant was led by the main argument of his critique to
place such a severe restriction on the use of the principle of
causality as to render it of no avail in building a philosophy of
reality.
It will be remembered that this principle was for Kant
a universal and necessary judgment. So far all looks well.
Like all other judgments, however, which exhibit the marks
of universality and necessity, it revealed the work of the
a priori mental processes. In other words, Kant held that the
mind spontaneously asserted this principle, at the moment of
experience, in order to integrate its knowledge, and to set up
relations between the separate elements or factors. Like all
other "Categories," causality was valid only for phenomenal
knowledge. It could not be applied to reality, or beyond
the range of phenomena, without courting the disaster of
uncertainty and contradiction.
All the speculative work about the nature of reality, all the
arguments drawn from causality in favour of the existence of
God, were thus condemned. It was the most cruel restriction
that a philosopher has ever imposed upon our thought, with-
out actually embracing Scepticism. To this strange doctrine
may in large measure be traced the present stagnant condition


288 REALITY AND TRUTH
of our speculative sciences, "this pathological interlude," the
lassitude and weariness of spirit that seems to have overcome
the philosophers, who now set out to criticize and not to con-
struct. Fortunately the Kantian theory of causality is demon-
strably false.
As our previous criticisms have implicitly condemned Kant's
vision of this all-important principle, we need only gather to-
gether a few relevant observations.
The principle of causality he regarded as a synthetic a priori
judgment. It, therefore, shares the fate of all other judgments
or principles that fall into this group. We have already shown
that these judgments are neither sufficient nor necessary to
provide a solid basis for our scientific knowledge. Worse
still their use cannot be justified. On the other hand, by
accepting the plain fact that all our mental output is a reaction
to experience, we find ourselves in possession of a satisfactory
explanation of all Kant's difficulties. As a rule the criterion
for the truth of a principle is evidence. But there is more to
be said in favour of causality.
Causality is unique among all principles, in having so strange
and intimate a relation with the principle of contradiction.1
The point has already been raised and settled, and we ourselves
have fearlessly used the principle of causality at every turning-
point in our theory of knowledge. Our proof of the existence
of a real world, our discussion of the validity of knowledge, our
solution of ultra-realist and idealist difficulties, have all turned
upon the ultimate truth of the causal law.
Our defence will be remembered. The principle of contra-
diction, "that a thing cannot both be and not be," is obviously
a judgment that can be applied throughout the whole range of
being, to phenomena, noumena, and all things that are. Its
constitutive terms show no trace of particularity; they are
"transcendental" in the sense that they are as wide as the
universal scheme of being. The principle is warranted by
every element of our experience, affirmed at every turn of our
1 See chap, iv., "The Principle of Causality ".


KNOWLEDGE: CRITICISM AND A PARALLEL 289
thought, and in the formulation of every judgment. It is
incapable of being doubted; we tried and failed. It is in-
capable of being denied: we tried and found ourselves affirm-
ing the principle to support its own denial. We are thus in
presence of a principle, which besides being indubitable and
undeniable, is applicable throughout the whole gamut of reality.
Now as we showed,1 the denial of the principle of causality
involves the denial of the principle of contradiction. Causality
therefore cannot be denied, wherever the law of contradiction
can be affirmed. Causality gives the law of change: contradic-
tion gives the law of being. Thus wherever there is a being that
changes, whether it be phenomenal or real, whoever, whatever
it be, the causal law is always applicable. In this strange way
the principle of causality shares in the range and scope of the
principle of contradiction, with which it has so unique an
attachment. We may use it therefore wherever we find change,
penetrating, by its aid, as far as may be into the ultimate con-
stitution of things, and into the necessity of a First Cause,
fount and origin of all efficiency and all activity.
Briefly Kant's attempt to restrict the one search-principle of
philosophy to phenomena is wholly unfounded. Not until we
have laid aside the whole doctrine of a priori processes and a
priori judgments; not until we have abandoned the revolu-
tionary methods of the philosophic Copernicus, shall we
begin once again to lay the solid foundations of a science of
being.
The Contrast in Brief.
We may now, leaving aside all questions of detail and
method, bring together in gaunt contrast the leading differ-
ences between the Kantian theory of knowledge and our own
critical realism.
I. Kant was convinced that the mental processes which
render the sciences and philosophy possible were a priori
1 Chap. iv„ " Rational Doubt and its Results",
19


29o REALITY AND TRUTH
—independent of experience. We have shown good reason
for holding that there is no such thing as an a priori mental
process, that they are one and all a posteriori, depen-
dent both for their actuation and content upon experience.
The a priori processes fail to justify our knowledge. Once
accept the simple fact of their dependence upon experi-
ence, and the justification is relatively simple.
II. Kant asserted, in consequence of this vitiating a priori
theory, and as the result of a long and faulty technical inquiry,
that we can gain no knowledge of ultimate reality by the use
of pure reason. The pure reason in all its efforts was bound,
under pain of getting out of its depth and floundering hope-
lessly, to group and systematize phenomena. We on the
other hand have suggested and even shown that our knowledge
of phenomena can never stop short at the phenomena them-
selves. Appearances are the appearances or manifestations
of something, which something is none other than the ultimate
substantial reality. Such knowledge of reality is positive
though mediate and indirect; if tested carefully, it is both
significant and reliable. Kant is an agnostic. We are
critical realists.
III. Lastly, Kant held that the principle of causality was
nothing more than a spontaneous operation of the mind,
a coupling judgment between the separate elements of our
phenomenal knowledge. We observe succession: by the
spontaneous effort of our minds we divine causality. We on
the other hand have shown that causality is a real, ontological
principle, which may be applied fearlessly, wherever change
exists, within the length and breadth of the universe of being.
No change can fully explain itself. Nothing which changes,
noumenon or phenomenon, reality or conscious state, can be
to itself the full and adequate reason of its own transformation.
This is the liberating principle of philosophic inquiry. Our
endeavour in philosophy is to gauge the full and adequate
reasons, the ultimate principles and causes of all being and
all becoming.


KNOWLEDGE: CRITICISM AND A PARALLEL 291
The Critique of the Practical Reason Untenable.
So much for a summary of our leading differences, from which
a multitude of others maybe "unpacked". Let the broad
outline suffice. The two theories of knowledge are thoroughly
and absolutely incompatible. If we had so desired, we might
have turned against Kant's " Critique of the Practical Reason,"
to show its dogmatic tendency, its hurried analysis, its still
more hurried conclusions, and its general insecurity. We
have already suggested the great outstanding difference be-
tween the two Critiques. The student of Hume wrote the
"Critique of the Pure Reason," which shows lasting traces of
the Scotsman's sceptical bias. The son of a devout pietist
mother, bent on rescuing his belief in God, freedom, and
immortality at any cost, wrote the "Critique of the Practical
Reason" which shows lasting traces of his early, vehement,
unanalytic belief. All the rigour of analysis, all the critical
acumen, all the reluctance and vision of restriction of the
critic of the Pure Reason, desert Kant the Dogmatist when he
turns to build his ultimate metaphysic by means of the Practical
Reason.
We, who stand to rescue philosophy, and particularly the
theory of knowledge, from both the sceptic and the dogma-
tist, have rejected the "Critique of the Pure Reason," largely
for its "scientific," unproven Scepticism. We now reject the
"Critique of the Practical Reason," for its sheer unanalytic
Dogmatism. The theses are excellent and even true: but
the methods are insecure, the "proofs" impossible.
All our penetration of reality is effected by means of postu-
lates founded upon the dictates of conscience or Categorical
Imperative. Briefly the Categorical Imperative gives rise to
three necessary practical assumptions of freedom, immortality,
and God. On the ground of their necessity, we are thereby
justified in the use of conceptions to which the Speculative
Reason can never of itself securely attain.
First, the dictates of conscience are meaningless unless we
are free. So far, so good. The Categorical Imperative does
61*


29* REALITY AND TRUTH
indeed argue the freedom of the will within the domain of
moral action. Secondly, the dictates of conscience are meaning-
less unless we are immortal . We require a never-ending
existence in order to attain to complete holiness, or absolute
harmony with the moral law. Why, we ask involuntarily?
Why a never-ending existence? Why should our approxima-
tion be never-ending, like the asymptote of an hyperbola?
Why cannot the identity of our will with the Categorical Im-
perative be effected in this life? Why, with a stern sense of
duty, and a stoical sense of the splendour of obedience,
could we not purge our minds of all lower sensuous motives
even "on this side death "?
Or if death overtake us before this identity of our will with
the moral law be fully effected, why should it not be com-
pleted in one "crowded hour of glorious life" beyond the
tomb? Why, in other words, does the Categorical Imperative
argue any persistence after death? or if it does argue per-
sistence, why immortality rather than mere survival for a time?
To all these questions Kant gave no answer, because none
is possible. His wish was father to his thought in the "Critique
of the Practical Reason"; his "will to believe" almost un-
bounded. By dint of this *' will to believe" he transformed
what might possibly be a suasio into a necessary postulate.
Lastly, the dictates of conscience lead us to postulate God's
existence. The moral law commands, and we are supposed
to obey blindly, without any reference to our own impulses
or desires. Incidentally this is a strange, inhuman travesty
of the moral law, but that by the way. Such was Kant's
vision. We must act without any desire or hope of happiness,
or pleasure, just because the imperious edict of our conscience
has been heard. We must obey the Categorical Imperative
because it commands, and for no other reason. Yet ultim-
ately our Practical Reason demands complete harmony between
virtue or holiness and happiness. It is seen to be fitting that
perfect goodness and perfect happiness should coincide in the
same person. Hence we must postulate the existence of


KNOWLEDGE: CRITICISM AND A PARALLEL 293
a Cause, which is capable of effecting the exact agreement
in an immortal life, between virtue and happiness.
Now a cause, if this train of thought be accurate, there
certainly must be. But why need morality be rewarded with
happiness? Whence springs this principle, that there must
ultimately be complete harmony between the punishment and
the vice, the reward and the virtue? If one could prove the
existence of a God, who is good, there might be something
to be said for this momentous principle of adjustment. To
prove God, or to find His existence a necessary postulate,
by means of a principle which already involves His Providence
and therefore implicitly His existence is not possible in phil-
osophy.
And even granted the necessary existence of some Cause,
empowered to effect this grand adjustment of happiness to
virtue, why need such a cause be infinite? Why need it be
a person? Why omniscient, or omnipotent? Why immense
or eternal? Why intelligent? Why actuated by will? In
other words, why need such a cause be in any sense the
God of Kant's simple pietistic faith? To all these questions,
once again, Kant vouchsafed no answer. In his dogmatic
moods, he tolerated neither difficulties nor questions, as he
swept forward towards his goal. Like many another dog-
matist, his thought was not only driven forward but also
blinded by his vehement desire to defend a cause which he
knew to be good. The cause is indeed good; but the method
of defence is not acceptable.
We have only delayed for a moment to show how Kant
the sceptical critic could play the part of an unflinching
dogmatist. Presumably it cannot be otherwise. Speculative
problems can only be discussed and solved by the speculative
reason which Kant had maimed. To attempt to solve them
by means of the practical reason is to allow both feeling and
will to play a part in their unravelling. Feeling and will are
indeed good, but they have no part to play in the pursuit
of philosophic truth.


294 REALITY AND TRUTH
In considering the "Critique of the Pure Reason," we differed
fundamentally both from the methods and conclusions of its
author. In glancing at his work on the Practical Reason, we
have differed sometimes from the conclusions but more
especially from the dogmatism of the methods. In order to
insure against these sudden and meaningless alternations
between scepticism and dogmatism, we have endeavoured
throughout our essay to be severely and consistently critical.
On that account we have given this general scheme of ideas,
involving both methods and construction, the name of Critical
Realism.


CHAPTER XIII.
THE POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY.
Within sight of our journey's end, we naturally revert in
thought to our beginnings. Our initial programme was sug-
gested in five questions, to which we have so constantly turned.
They have formed "the warp" of our essay, while the "woof"
might be sought perhaps in our inventory of knowledge. Out
of the answers to the five questions, and of the vindication of
the triple element found in the inventory, our theory of Critical
Realism is woven.
Vindication of our Inventory of Knowledge.
Before we began our critical constructive work, it will be
remembered that we were obliged to make an inventory of our
knowledge. We found that knowledge consisted of elementary
data in the shape of sense-impressions and concepts, and of
judgments in which those data were combined or manipulated.
The judgments, on closer scrutiny, could be divided into those
which were immediate—processless and indemonstrable—and
those which were mediate, depending upon argument, process
or proof. Summing up more sharply we find that knowledge
consists (i) of irreducible data in the form of sensations and
concepts, (2) of immediate judgments, and (3) of mediate
judgments.
What then are our findings as to each of these three elements
of our knowledge?
I. First, the immediate data of sense and intellect. We found
that, if all the necessary conditions were fulfilled, sense-impres-
sions might give us a true and valid, though indirect, know-
295


296 REALITY AND TRUTH
ledge of the properties and qualities of things. Further, that if
our concepts were properly tested, they might give us a true and
valid representation of the nature of things.
II. Secondly, the immediate judgments. As they are neces-
sarily indemonstrable, it is useless to apply the test of evidence.
Moreover, we must begin somewhere. We cannot presuppose
the existence of a real world, which is involved in the very
conception of evidence. Any ordinary "proof" of these
immediate propositions is therefore strictly impossible. Nor
can "intuition" be invoked. How shall we guarantee the
accuracy of the intuition? Intuitions which, reverberating
through consciousness, illuminate whole tracts of knowledge,
may be right or wrong, true or false. The fulness or clearness
of our "vision" of a "truth" is no test of its validity. An
intuition is no more at best than a Cartesian "idee claire et
distincte," which, in spite of all its lucidity and distinctness,
may be wholly unfounded.
These immediate judgments, without which we cannot move
forward one step in the theory of knowledge, are thus awkward
and intractable entities. Evidence cannot he sought in their
support, nor is any immediate intuition of any avail. Yet we
require, before making a start, that they should be both in-
dubitable and undeniable. There remains only one possi-
bility. We must attempt to doubt and deny these. This is
what we termed the movement of rational doubt, which
brought us, by a long and circuitous route, to the conclusion
that it lies beyond the power of the human mind to doubt
either the three "laws of thought," or, in consequence, the
pendent principle of causality. So much for the four out-
standing immediate judgments of importance.
Other immediate judgments, such as the axioms of various
kinds, may be tested in a similar way. But in their case there
is another alternative. By means of these first four indemon-
strable but indubitable propositions, we are enabled to establish
the existence of a real world, and in consequence the validity
of our sensorial and intellectual evidence. Hence, if we wish,


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 297
we can appeal to evidence in support of quite a large number
of these immediate propositions. We must, however, refrain
from moving in circles, and from destroying our own founda-
tions. We must test "the laws of thought" and the important
principle of causality, not by evidence nor by intuition, but by
the method of doubt and denial.
III. Lastly, there are the mediate judgments which avowedly
turn upon some process or proof. We have seen that there are
many secondary criteria of their probability. There is, how-
ever, only one primary criterion of their truth, to wit, evidence.
The Accuracy of the Reasoning Process.
And yet—here we begin to break new ground—over and
above the facts which evidence, carefully sifted, may attest,
there remains the question of the process or proof employed
by the mind in arriving at these mediate propositions. What,
then, is to be said of our reasoning process itself? What
guarantee have we of its accuracy? What gives us the quiet
assurance that we reason correctly in formulating mediate
judgments? Let the importance of this our last problem be
noted. Nearly all our knowledge can be cast into the form of
these mediate judgments, which depend upon some marshalling
of facts, some intellectual manipulation, some deductive reason-
ing, some argument, process, or proof. If our reasoning pro-
cesses themselves are vitiated, then, not all, but the vast bulk
of our knowledge must disappear into the night . On the
nature of our answer depends the whole possibility of science
and philosophy. We have reached another crisis—the last.
We may put the question in another way, in order to light
up a second train of ideas. Our intellects are capable of three
distinct functions, which have recurred like some leit-motiv
throughout this essay. By means of intellect, we conceive
ideas, we form judgments, linking together the simpler ideas,
or we reason, linking together no longer the simple ideas but
the actual judgments. So far we have established the possible
validity of concepts: as representatives of extra-mental natures


298 REALITY AND TRUTH
they may be erroneous, but the error can be tracked. Similarly,
we have established the possible validity of judgments, and
submitted the criterion of evidence. There remains the
reasoning process; not the judgments that are manipulated,
but the actual work of manipulation; not the power of judg-
ing, but the power of concluding; not the content of our pro-
positions, but their connection and sequence; not our ideas
but the " Gang" of our ideas, which needs to be scrutinized
and defended. Is the reasoning process itself valid?
Now reasoning is of two distinct kinds, which must be
considered separately. First, we may reason deductively by
combining a general and a particular proposition in our
thought, and then drawing a conclusion. All the possible
"figures " and "moods," all the necessary canons, conditions,
and laws of this deductive reasoning have long since been
standardized in the manuals of logic. The possibilities of
"deduction," or syllogistic reasoning, have thus been fully
explored, and sometimes even exploited.
The second type of reasoning, which is all-important for
life and scientific knowledge, no less than for philosophy, is
induction. By this process, which has its own canons and
laws, we combine, not generals and particulars to draw more
specific conclusions, but particulars with particulars, in order
to move forward to some general inclusive statement or law.
Briefly, when we ask is the reasoning process itself valid, we
mean, simply, is deduction—the act of deducing—possible,
and is induction—the act of extracting general information
from particular cases—licit.
Is Deductive Reasoning Possible?
Over the deductive forms of reasoning we need not long
delay. Deduction is mediate inference. In a judgment—
however much the doctrine may be disliked by certain
philosophers—two terms are connected. The terms may be
thought of separately, or jointly; if separately, we form con-


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 299
cepts, if jointly, judgments. Moreover, as we have elsewhere
suggested, it is only necessary to begin to speak some unusual,
foreign tongue, in order to experience the slow "heave" of the
mind as it combines its concepts in judgments.
Now as a preliminary to drawing a conclusion, two judgments
are taken, each containing one different and one identical term
or concept. In the two judgments taken together, therefore,
two separate and distinct ideas are linked in some way with a
third. The third is the middle term or medium, and hence the
name mediate inference. The conclusion is effected on linking
together the two separate and distinct ideas by means of their
common relationship with the third. The first is related to
the third, and the second to the third. The relationship of the
first to the second is "deduced ". In the conclusion the third
or middle term disappears: its introduction was only a device,
an intermediary, a means to an end. So much for the pro-
cess. Doubtless it has many forms, and a hundred different
applications, throughout the old "barbara celarent" syllogisms,
and the other forms of mediate inference. Wherever found,
the deductive process is essentially the same. Two terms are
each connected with a third. The third is eliminated and the
two are themselves connected. Is the process valid?
Probably the description we have given of the process is its
best defence. We can at least know what a concept contains,
and what it excludes, and incidentally the whole content can
be verified. It is therefore obvious that we can see how far
two concepts or two ideas agree or disagree; how far they in-
clude or repel one another. Naturally, too, the agreement or
disagreement, in any case the connection, can be articulated in
the form of a proposition. So much for the judgment-process,
which we have already defended. Now if we can compare two
ideas, it is obvious that we can compare three. To do so,
owing to the nature of things, we shall require two propositions.
If we wish then to compare each of two ideas with a third, in
order to facilitate our vision of the compatibility or connection
of the two, who can deny our right? In other words, "deduc-
X


300 REALITY AND TRUTH
tion," which is only a device for linking two ideas by means
of a third, stands as a process beyond reproach.
Conditions, canons, laws, may be drawn up, in order to
guide our thoughts with greater facility. Economy of mental
effort thus leads to the formulation of "rules of thumb".
Mathematical problems, once solved, may be standardized in
some general formula. Similarly, logical problems, concerning
the limits of compatibility of two ideas, owing to the relation
with a common third, may be solved, and standardized in the
syllogistic and other formulae. All such formulae are mere
mechanical contrivances, skeleton solutions. The justification
of the deductive process lies elsewhere. It is really nothing
more than a systematic classification of ideas. If we can
compare two ideas, there is no reason why we cannot compare
three, taking them two at a time. The connection of the last
two will be the conclusion of the inference. Because we can
judge, we can reason.
Is Inductive Reasoning Possible?
There is clearly no great difficulty in supporting the deduc-
tive side of the rational process. What then is to be said
of induction? The process itself is easy to comprehend. We
scrutinize a certain number of particular facts, according to
certain principles or canons, and then infer a general law. It
is the scientific way of generalizing from the particular, of in-
tegrating the fleeting, sporadic elements of experience, so that
they may be held in some inclusive statement. But is it valid?
Because n types of matter possess the property of extension,
what enables one to infer that all matter is extended? Might
not the « + Ith type turn out to be inextended after all? Be-
cause matter in certain tested cases attracts other matter ac-
cording to the well-known law, what enables me to conclude
that all material things are subject to the law of gravitation?
What can enable me to move beyond the three, four, or n
particular cases that I study? A hundred facts are merely
a hundred particular statements, a file of instances. By what


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 301
right do I include them and all other beliefs of the same kind,
in one embracing conclusion?
Or to pass to more ordinary instances, because P and Q
are associated properties of things, in a certain limited
number of tested cases, why on observing P should I infer
the existence of Q? Because P and Q have been associated
in the past, why should they not dissolve partnership in the
future? How can the past dictate to the future in this way?
The future, after all, is unknown: nay more, it does not
exist. Why, therefore, are we so quietly convinced that it
will resemble the past?
The Problem of Induction.
If the actual present and the coming future did not resemble
the past, then, of course, all our "experience" would be value-
less. Each moment would bring a twist in the kaleidoscope,
a new beginning, and with it a new reaction of the mind to the
altered circumstances. Life would be an unsteady, complicated
series of surprises, "experience" a thing of dots and dashes,
and our consciousness a bewildering chaos of isolated impres-
sions. Some kind of " creative evolution," by which everything
was created anew in each successive instantaneous present would
hold the field. All the laws of science and observation would
disappear, in this Wissens-dammerung, and the philosopher
would stand silent, amazed, if not aghast, at the untiring new-
ness of things.
Knowledge of a man's character or temperament, which
we found upon his typical reactions, would give way to open-
eyed wonder at the fitfulness and spontaneity of his doings,
and the one law of history, "that a revolution is usually
preceded by a period of discontent," would disappear as a
reckless generalization! We should all revert to the "buzz-
ing confusion" of childhood. Children sometimes ask "what
is next Wednesday?" "when will spring come?" "shall I
have breakfast to-morrow?" "will my dolly die?" If the
future did not resemble the past we should all maintain this


3o2 REALITY AND TRUTH
freshness of outlook, the child's undying wonder as to the
"how," "why," "what," and general sequence of things. It
might even yield some sense of liberation, this general inability
to distinguish "Wednesday-week " from the coming spring. . . .
Briefly our practical lives and all our knowledge depend upon
the validity of induction. Without it we could have no assur-
ance that situations would recur, no certainty that the things of
to-morrow would bear any resemblance to those of to-day. De-
prived of the inductive principle, we should never know what
to expect from hour to hour, nor how people or things were
likely to behave. Change in our actual lives is a sufficiently
insistent and bewildering experience. But changes recur:
they move in cycles, in obedience to physical and biological
law. Without the truths of induction, our experience would
be of mere change without recurrence; of change, fitful, spor-
adic, spontaneous, utterly lacking in sequence, regularity,
meaning, or goal.
It may be said that the past contains many a buried future,
that all the years of our lives from being future have crossed
the threshold of the living present and then disappeared into
the past. True; and the conclusion? That our past experi-
ence yields us knowledge of the future? By no means. What
the future has been in the past, we know. What the coming
future may be, who shall say? If the future is to resemble the
past, doubtless our experience will enable us to reduce the
"imprtvu," and to chart the unknown. But this general sta-
bility of things, this resemblance between the future and the
past, is just precisely the point at issue in our discussion of the
validity of induction.
In the past men have predicted the appearance of a comet,
or the reappearance of a planet. At the scheduled time, the
prediction has been verified. Excellent. And the conclusion?
That we can predict the future? No! but that we have some-
times been able to predict the future in the past. Yet we
are "outward-bound" and strain our eyes towards the coming
future. As to that future, only the principle of induction can


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 303
yield us any measure of security. Without it even the gaunt
fact of the approach of death would remain an interesting but
uncertain possibility. Is induction valid?
Hume and the Probability of Induction.
The philosophers have given varying answers. Hume said
that we record impressions, and that memory reveals recur-
rences. By "custom" we are thus led to anticipate the
future, this anticipation or belief being nothing more than
"inverted recollection". Briefly, induction was for him the
outcome of a "belief," founded upon "memory," certified by
"custom ". Huxley, writing of Hume's doctrine, says :1 ". . .
If our beliefs of expectation are based upon our beliefs of
memory, and anticipation is only inverted recollection, it ne-
cessarily follows that every belief of expectation implies the
belief that the future will have a certain resemblance to the
past. From the first hour of experience onwards, this belief
is constantly being verified, until old age is inclined to suspect
that experience has nothing new to offer. And when the ex-
perience of generation after generation is recorded . . ., when
repeated and minute examination never reveals a break in the
chain of causes and effects; and the whole edifice of practical
life is built upon our faith in its continuity; the belief that that
chain has never been broken and will never be broken becomes
one of the strongest and most justifiable of human convictions."
All this is admirable, both as a summary of Hume, and as
a statement of fact. Doubtless the memory of the past "eats
into the future". Doubtless "custom" and "belief," based
upon so wide and full a review of the facts, establishes a
high probability. But "custom," "belief," "expectation,"
"memory "—even "memory "—can only yield a probable
answer in favour of induction. Memory, the appointed way
of reviving and reproducing associated impressions, while it
remains merely sensuous, can never rise above the condition
1 Huxley's " Hume," chap, vii., opening words.


304 REALITY AND TRUTH
of particularity inherent in all sense-impressions. By amassing
particular instances, we arrive, by "custom " and "memory,"
not at a general law, but at a high probability that "as things
have been they will be "• This is what Kant affirmed when
he said in his introduction: ". . . Experience never imparts
to its judgments, true or strict, but only assumed or relative -
universality (by means of induction), so that we ought always
to say, so far as we have observed hitherto, there is no excep-
tion to this or that rule ".1
But can we move beyond the sphere of probability? Memory,
articulating the fitful series of sense-impressions, would—once
it was certified as an accurate process, and incidentally what
certifies memory?—yield us a conviction that the inductive
process was probably true. Can we go further and affirm its
truth? Between probability and truth there is fixed a gulf.
Perhaps we normally think of probabilities gradually increasing
in intensity until, growing more and more probable, they finally
become true. But this idea, however widespread, is nothing
short of a travesty of the facts. The highest probability—even
the mathematical probabilities which, on the average, work out
so satisfactorily—may be overthrown by one simple fact, by
one "brush " with reality. The smallest truth is irrefragable.
When, therefore, we ask if it is possible to affirm not only
the probability but the truth of the inductive procedure, we ask
if its validity can be put once and for all beyond the range of
difficulty, doubt, or denial. If it be only probable—most of
the philosophers rest content in this assertion—then all our
natural sciences are insecurely built, and all the thousand uses
of induction in ordinary life, by which, in spite of many a
crisis, we know how to regard the future, are no more, perhaps,
than sand-castles built against the incoming tide. With the
help of sense-impressions and emotions—Hume's two all-
inclusive conscious events—it is impossible to establish the
validity of induction. By memory—the residue of sense-
impression and "experience" in consciousness—it is impos-
1" Critique of Pure Reason," Introduction, Max Miiller, vol. i. p. 400.


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 305
sible to pass beyond the range of probability. What, then,
can give us a guarantee of its truth?
Induction not merely Probable but True.
Over and above the sensorial impressions, over and above
all possible modes of their concatenation and revival in sensi-
tive memory, we possess intellectual knowledge. The proof,
based upon purely psychological considerations, indeed upon
the varying phenomena of consciousness, has already been
given.1 We are not, therefore, at the mercy of sense-impres-
sions, actual or revived. We possess concepts—the simplest
form of intellectual knowledge—which are not faint impres-
sions, nor blurred images, nor any compound of sense-ele-
ments. They are irreducible modes of consciousness, giving
us the "meaning " of things, yielding us knowledge positive,
though mediate and indirect, of the nature of reality. More-
over, these concepts are general or, as is sometimes said,
universal. They are not, and can never be, particular. To
these general representations of the nature of things, therefore,
we look for the only true vindication of the inductive process,
without which our life and thought would be one wild series
of hazards and surprises.
Let us recall very briefly the chief results of our former
inquiry into our intellectual knowledge. The nature or
essence of a thing is grasped by the intellect, as a being
endowed with this or that other property, capable of reacting
in this or that well-defined manner. To become quite prosaic
but precise, we seize—need we repeat indirectly?—a nature N
which manifests itself in the properties P and Q. Now it may
easily happen that one or more of the observed properties are
due to purely accidental, transitory circumstances, as, for in-
stance, the colour of a rose seen against a certain background,
or the "burnt-paper " taste of tobacco-smoke after a period of
high fever.
On the other hand, there are properties which no variation
1 Chap, vii., " Our Grasp of Reality ".
20


306 REALITY AND TRUTH
of condition can in the least affect. In consequence they
are suitably regarded as the permanent manifestation of a
particular reality, and—seeing that things fall into groups—
of its species. No variation of condition will prevent matter
from being extended. The volume may change, as in the case
of explosives, from something very small to something very
considerable, but something extended will in every case re-
main. Similarly no variation of condition will affect the at-
traction which every particle of matter exerts on every other.
It would not be true to say that an unsupported body neces-
sarily falls to the ground: witness the autumn leaves which,
driven by the wind, mount instead of falling, and the aero-
planes and other craft that ride the air. But the law of
gravitation, of this universal attraction of matter for matter,
holds good—we exert a force against a force—in these and
other cases.
Now once by a careful process of observation, experiment,
and elimination we have determined what are the permanent
properties of things, or the essential as opposed to the acci-
dental features of a situation—all the canons and rules of
induction are directed to this end—we may justify the induc-
tive process. By the permanent qualities we identify the
nature from which they spring: the same nature must and
will always have the same enduring qualities. Why? Be-
cause the qualities are the connatural manifestation of the
nature, not mere phenomena shrouding some intangible, un-
knowable noumenon. As they reveal the nature, while the
nature remains the same, they cannot and will not change.
A "person" will always have the powers of intelligence,
sensation, volition, feeling, and the rest. Matter while it re-
mains matter must always possess the properties of extension
and attraction. \{per impossibile we came across some specimen
of " matter " deprived of extension, we should say, very truly,
that it looked like matter but was really something totally
different. A leopard, they say, cannot change its spots. In
any case matter cannot change its nature, nor, in consequence,


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 307
its permanent characteristics. Similarly, if per impossibile we
came across a "human person" who was totally lacking in
any intellectual power of conceiving, judging, or reasoning,
however fitful or inconsequent, we should say that "it" looked
like a human being but was really some kind of animal. Ra-
tionality—though not the indefeasible variety—is an inalien-
able characteristic of persons. Human nature cannot change;
hence the recurrence of this connatural manifestation.
By intellect we have some appreciation of reality, of the
nature of things, which endures amid the flux. By intellect we
rise above the fretful condition of particularity which inheres
so obstinately in all the impressions and derivatives of sense.
By intellect, which seizes " the general," we formulate general
laws and justify induction.
Instances abound. Atoms, to take a case, enjoy the pro-
perty of weight, which we measure not absolutely as so much
avoirdupois, but relatively to the weight of hydrogen. More-
over, the atomic weight is distinctive of the different chemical
bodies, being associated with a particular affinity, a particular
atomicity, and a particular group of chemical and physical
properties. Once in possession of the atomic weight of a
substance, we fix it and infer the rest of its properties: our
induction is founded upon our indirect seizure of the nature
of the thing. Similarly, if I remark in something presented to
my gaze, the property of extension, I may infer the coexistence
in this same body of all the other properties which are shared
by living and inorganic matter: the nature of the thing which
reveals itself unchangeably in one property, must reveal itself
also in the others. Lastly, if I hear a spoken language—a
characteristic of intelligent creatures without being in any
sense a definition of them—I may infer the existence of a
person, possessing the other normal, inalienable properties.
Once again the nature, which we have "fixed," justifies the
induction.
In the final analysis the principle of induction, whereby we
extend and consolidate our knowledge, moving from particular


308 REALITY AND TRUTH
events to general statements, and from the past to the future,
all turns upon the principle of identity, "a thing is what it is ";
the same nature will always have the same manifestations. Or,
conversely, the same permanent qualities and distinguishing
characteristics will always point to a nature of the same species.
Mistakes may easily be made. Transitory features may be
mistaken for something permanent, or we may trip over what
we consider to be the distinguishing characteristic of a par-
ticular object or species. The canons of induction lay down
the rules for obviating these fallacies. If those rules be fol-
lowed faithfully, we may be certain of the result. Just as
we can deal with triangles in geometry, without introducing
any shade of particularity—a characteristic of intellectual
operations—so in the natural sciences and philosophy we
can deal with the natures of things, to which we have access
by means of intellect. Briefly, induction is justified because,
in addition to our sensorial knowledge, which moves on the
plane of particularity, we enjoy an intellectual type of know-
ledge which, seizing the nature of things, moves on the plane
of generality. To vindicate the generalizations of our know-
ledge, we look to the legitimate generalizing power of intellect
which grasps "the generalities " of things. By means of in-
tellect we soar high above the region of opinion and proba-
bility: we possess knowledge.
In the course of our analysis, we have made appeal to the
principle of identity "that a thing is what it is," on which the
validity of induction securely rests. Lest perhaps anyone at
this, the eleventh, hour should challenge that principle, may
we remind our reader that it was long since vindicated ?l On
being submitted to the "ordeal by doubt," it passed unscathed.
It is therefore indubitable.
The Foundations of Science are Secure.
In every science we endeavour to group together whole
masses of fact, of immediate data, and to hold them in the
1 Chap, v., " Rational Doubt and its Results ".


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 309
smallest possible compass by the formulation of general laws.
In any science, there will be found large groups of facts, de-
rived immediately from sense-data, a certain number of prin-
ciples, an occasional postulate carrying with it the note of
probability, and lastly a number of theories which combine
facts, principles, and postulates in one coherent whole. Now
we have shown that sense-data, if properly interpreted, are
eminently trustworlhy; that principles can be tested either
by doubt and denial or by evidence; and, further, that the
manipulation of facts and the welding of judgments by deduc-
tive and inductive processes, is legitimate. We have estab-
lished the possibility of science. The foundations of knowledge
are secure.
Philosophy almost an Outcast.
After presenting the case for the natural sciences, we turn to
discuss the possibility of philosophy, which once enjoyed the
proud title "mistress of the sciences". Within recent times
philosophy has fallen on evil days: the old designation
"scientia scientiarum " is forgotten: from being the "mistress"
she is now something of an outcast. A number of causes have
contributed to the downfall. The repeated successes of the
natural sciences, and their pioneer researches, have dazzled the
minds of many men, who, in consequence, have developed an
almost exclusive passion for hunting facts. Clinging to their
microscopes they have faithfully registered, classified, and con-
catenated their immediate observations. Of a wider synthesis
'that should "hold" and explain themselves, the microscope
and the object of their inquiry, they have dreamt little.
Then, too, the oscillations of the philosophers—philosophy
seems, not to move gradually outward or forward, but to
"lurch" incontinently from system to system—have contrasted
badly with the triumphs of the men of science. For the dis-
repute into which our study has fallen, philosophers themselves
are much to blame. Systems abound. Many a philosopher
has taken his pen and written quickly some all-inclusive


310 REALITY AND TRUTH
account of the universe, which, while revealing no little im-
aginative skill, has shown no particular grasp of the primary
facts and laws of science. To write about "life" without
knowing the facts and laws of biology, or to discuss "matter"
without studying the physical sciences, has justly seemed to the
men of our day, with their fine but exclusive inductive bias,
little short of a scandal.
Metaphysic has thus come to be regarded as an "airy"
region where philosophers, liberating themselves from the
"tyranny" of reality, and above all from any scientific re-
search, spin luminous dreams: or to vary the metaphor, as a
kind of Democritan Void where atoms in the shape of ideas,
after many attractions and repulsions, coalesce to form the
various systems. Men smile at philosophers, and the philo-
sophers themselves taking the work of their predecessors and
contemporaries over-seriously—is it in self-defence ?—tend to
forget their study in recounting its history and vicissitudes.
The pursuit of wisdom is now almost strangled by the history of
the pursuit. Thus by the neglect of scientific data, and by the
exaggerated cultivation of the general history of ideas, philo-
sophers have contributed in no small measure to the downfall
of the "mistress of the sciences". From being more like
geometry it has become more like history.
Of the many other causes, we may single out for comment
the language of the philosophers. Men of letters, and lovers
of literature not unnaturally look askance at the forbidding, in-
human jargon of the conflicting systems. Philosophers, for-
getful that sublimity and simplicity go hand in hand, have
often enough surrendered both simplicity and clearness. They
have, concealed their thoughts, one might almost say they have
buried their philosophy alive, in some tortuous jargon, devoid
of all the natural power and beauty and—may we add?—
associations of our language. For the most enthralling of pro-
positions, they have often found the most stilted expression.
They have chilled men's minds and dashed their hopes, and
thereby rendered the treasures of philosophy inaccessible to


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 3ti
the many, by their neglect of the splendours and delicacies of
language.
Philosophy and Its Consecrated Problems.
At its best philosophy takes up the data and results of the
separate sciences—where else can reliable data be found?—
and pushes the inquiry one step further, back into the ultimate
causes, principles, reasons of things. Of course philosophy
covers certain disciplines like the theory of knowledge, which
do not depend upon other sciences. Indeed all science and
all knowledge, in which truth and certainty are involved, de-
pend upon the theory of knowledge, which sounds the furthest
deep. In this it differs from other branches of philosophy,
like cosmology and psychology.
Cosmology is the philosophy of the physical sciences, of the
inorganic world, while psychology is the philosophy of biologi-
cal science—more particularly of biology and physiology—and
of the empirical data of consciousness. In these branches of
speculative science, all the relevant scientific facts are ascer-
tained, and we pierce still further by synthesizing and consoli-
dating the wealth of knowledge scattered in the separate
sciences, and by unifying them in terms of ultimate causes.
We have already seen that our intellect has the power of
grasping, however indirectly, the nature of things. We have
seen too that the search-principle of causality, which carries us
ever further into the "arcana " of things, is applicable through-
out the whole vast range of being. There is therefore no im-
possibility in the ideal of the philosopher, which is nothing less
than the attempt to understand the whole cause of the nature of
things, in all these static and dynamic aspects.
From all the great problems which interest the race of men
there stand out three, the freedom of the will, the immortality
of the soul, the existence of God. These are problems which
every philosophy which is more than a mere synthesis of the
sciences or a criticism of our knowing powers, must attempt
to solve. We may roughly indicate the main outline of one


3i2 REALITY AND TRUTH
possible solution of each, in order to point our remarks about
the possibility of philosophic inquiry. Naturally we cannot in
a few paragraphs give the proofs. We only suggest the outline
of the proofs, in order to indicate the method of philosophy.
In discussing the possibility of science, we could single out
the critical problem of induction. There are, however, no
principles or methods proper to philosophy. We are therefore
driven to the consideration of special problems, in order to
indicate the nature and method of the philosophic synthesis.
The Method of Philosophy in Discussing Freedom.
First the freedom of the will. What does it imply? Not
that we can do exactly as we wish; for we, like all things com-
pounded of matter, are subject to physical laws. Not that we
do, as a matter of fact, choose freely in all the practical affairs
of life. Habit is strong, and very often we allow our nature,
character, or temperament to decide our actions: we may often
allow the dominant impulse to drive us to action. The theory
of human freedom does not attempt to deny any of these facts.
All that it asserts is that it is of the nature of the will to
be free; that the will need not necessarily be determined in
choosing between alternatives; that the will may be impelled,
but that it need not necessarily be compelled.
When we deliberate—the necessary preliminary of a free act
—we perceive advantages and disadvantages. The advantages
impel us: the disadvantages repel us: the whole compound of
impulsion and repulsion cannot issue in compulsion. There
are hundreds of cases in which we are frankly determined by
past convictions, by our characteristic ideals, by acquired
habits, by innate or hereditary tendencies, or by the impulse,
feeling, or passion of the moment. Who shall gainsay these
obvious facts? The theory of human freedom merely asserts
that in the case of normal people, this determination is not
necessary; that it is determination de facto and not de lege;
that, whether determined de facto in a particular case or not,
it is of the nature of the will to be free.


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 313
We can only glance at one proof which turns upon the out-
standing ethical facts of conscience and remorse. By con-
science, we mean a particular judgment, of a very categorical
and uncompromising nature, as to the goodness or badness of
a particular action. It does not suggest that the indicated
course of action is more desirable or more ideal. It gives
no "counsels of perfection ": it commands insistently in the
formula " thou shalt," or "thou shalt not ".
Remorse, the second great fact, is a judgment of self-con-
demnation after the event. It differs from regret in a hundred
ways. I may regret an earthquake in Italy or some railway
disaster, without feeling the slightest trace of responsibility or
remorse. Now, it is obvious that remorse, which is the most
gnawing and painful of our experiences, cannot depend upon
the will. If it did, it would be obliterated once and for all,
seeing that we instinctively desire the cessation of pain, particu-
larly pain of mind. Conscience and remorse, then, are facts
in our lives which assert themselves against our will, the one
checking and goading us in a hundred ways, with its imperious,
minatory judgments; the other rebuking us, in a recoil of self-
condemnation, for past infidelity to duty.
Now in psychology, when we have stated our facts, we
collect the actual and possible solutions. In this case, the
division is easy. Either the will must be determined, or it
must be free. There is no via media. One by one we con-
sider the determinist solutions that have been offered to
explain these strange world-wide insistent phenomena of
conscience and remorse. One by one they render these
phenomena utterly meaningless. What could be the mean-
ing of an imperative "thou shalt," if I were as determined as
a needle in presence of a magnet? What could be the mean-
ing of the recoil of self-condemnation, if I were no more
responsible for my moral action than for my physical adher-
ence to the earth's surface? One by one the determinist
solutions explain away the facts. We are left, therefore, with
the other alternative, that the will is free.


3i4 REALITY AND TRUTH
Immediately conscience and remorse assume a meaning.
Conscience is the promulgation of the law of our nature within
us, to guide our free decisions: remorse is the internal sanction
for its violation. Other proofs may be offered, and difficulties,
arising from the multitudinous differences in " consciences " and
various historical, ethnological considerations may be answered
and met. We are only indicating the method of the philoso-
pher. He considers what is meant by the will, and by freedom.
He collects and sifts a significant group of facts—here the facts
of conscience and remorse. He considers the alternative
solutions, and then proceeds to eliminate all but the one
theory which fits and interprets everything. He is on the
track of causes, his one instrument being the principle of
causality.
Method of Philosophy in Discussing Immortality.
Let us turn to the second of the final problems, that of
immortality, in order to show how the philosopher is driven
from material facts to so immaterial a conclusion. Matter is
divided into the living and non-living varieties. The non-
living, or inorganic, mineral world is characterized by transi-
tive activity. Living matter, on the other hand, shows a
characteristic gamut of immanent activities in the form of
nutrition, growth, and reproduction. For this reason there
are two distinct sciences of nature—the organic or biological,
and the inorganic or the physical.
Now to facilitate our analysis we speak of a vital principle,
meaning that principle—a principle is nothing more than "that
by which a thing is, is made, or is known "—which actuates the
characteristic immanent operations of living things. We human
beings are living organisms: we therefore share with all other
living things a vital principle. Now the problem of immortality
may be stated as follows: Is our vital principle material or
immaterial? If immaterial, does it survive the fact of death?
If it survives, does it persist unendingly?
First, is our vital principle immaterial? Let us start in our


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 315
psychological laboratories. Within the last few years much
evidence has been brought forward to show that intellect and
sense differ from one another radically, that they are irreducible
modes of consciousness. We have already proved the point in
our chapter on "Our Grasp of Reality". In other words, our
intellectual and sensorial operations, though interdependent
and complementary, are neither identical nor reducible to one
another, nor to any other psychological process which is simpler
than either. Intellect and sense are irreducible. Now sensa-
, tion is a direct and immediate function of the nervous system
and intellect is not. All the possible combinations of nervous
reception and discharge, of peripheral and central nervous
excitation, are exhausted by sensation, imagination, feeling,
locomotion, and volition. The intellectual element in conscious-
ness does not work immediately through the nervous system, nor
for that matter through any bodily organ.
Naturally intellect and sense are interdependent, and to that
extent intellect depends mediately and indirectly upon nervous
processes. But of itself it has no appropriate organ. There
is no part of the body, no element or group of elements in the
nervous system, to which one can point—as we do actually
point in the case of sensation—as the seat of intellectual
operations. Yet intellectual operations take place in con-
sciousness, giving us meanings, concepts, judgments, reason-
ings. They take place: they have no corresponding bodily
organ: they are therefore immaterial.
"But," it may be said, "intellectual operations may be sus-
pended by physical fatigue or by a natural or artificial state of
unconsciousness. By tampering with the physical or material
part you can thus maim the immaterial. Better to talk sense
and omit the immaterial entity."
Undoubtedly the facts are true. Only the inference is un-
sound. Physical fatigue suspends intellectual operations
because it removes the sine qua non conditions—imagery,
attention, concentration—which depend upon the nervous
system. The immaterial intellect has stringent material con-


316 REALITY AND TRUTH
ditions. But a condition is not a cause, nor, above all, is it a
bodily organ. Our own inference remains untouched.
So far we have only suggested the use of certain relevant
facts from experimental psychology and physiology. The rest
is an unavoidable chain of reasoning, leading to the conclu-
sion that the intellect is immaterial. Our vital principle is
the source of all our activity, of all our operations. One of
these operations, namely, that of intellect, is immaterial. It
therefore follows that the vital principle—or what is more
frequently spoken of as the soul—is immaterial. For what is
bounded by the laws of matter cannot produce something which
defies and escapes those laws.
Does the soul survive the fact of death? Being immaterial,
the human soul is not as matter: it is »°«extended and indivis-
ible. Now death is a catastrophe that can only overtake
material things. It is a phenomenon of disintegration, the
disruption of living into inorganic matter. It cannot affect
that which is indivisible. The human soul which is indivisible
cannot therefore die. It survives the fact of death. We offer
only a gaunt framework of proof. All the propositions in this
hurried sequence need to be explained and substantiated.
Is the soul immortal? Or in other words, is the survival
never-ending? If the soul cannot die, we see at least that it
could be annihilated, not disintegrated but reduced to nothing-
ness. The various arguments for and against this possibility
must be considered. They lead us to see that there is no
positive evidence in favour of annihilation. Against annihila-
tion there stands the general principle of teleology which of
course must be considered, explained and defended. In con-
clusion, we are led to deny the fact of annihilation, and to
assert the truth of immortality.
The problem of immortality, treated in this way—we have
only suggested the barest outline of the method—is an excellent
instance of philosophic inquiry. It shows that philosophers
collect their facts from the laboratories; and then combining
results from the separate sciences of experimental psychology


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 317
and physiology, press forward their conclusions into regions
which lie beyond the scope of those sciences. The whole of
such an inquiry represents no illuminating "solution sim-
pliste "; it is conducted slowly, step by step, in the full light
of all the relevant facts. It shows how philosophy can solve
one of life's mightiest problems.
The Philosophy of God's Existence.
We now turn to the last of the great triad, the question of
God's existence.
We are assured of the existence of a real world of persons
and things. If challenged, we can supply a satisfactory proof.
What is the origin of that world? Whence comes it? What
is the reason of the relative stability of the nature of things, in
spite of their incessant changes? What is the explanation
of the fact of change itself? Whence comes the activity, the
efficiency which every change demands? Briefly, what is the
ultimate cause of the being and becoming of things?
As things change, they cannot be to themselves the full and
sufficient reason of their own transformations. That is nothing
more than a statement of the principle of causality. Now the
cause to be the real cause must be the whole cause, and the
causes which we see ordinarily only yield a partial explanation
of the given efficiency. Where is the whole cause of all being
and all becoming to be sought?
One by one we consider the possible solutions. We only
delay for a moment over the suggestion of " absolute evolution ".
Did the evolution begin with something? What then is the
origin of the starting-point of the whole process? Leaving
aside a number of solutions, which might even seem out of
place in a fairy-story, we are left with two alternatives.
Either the being and becoming of things can be explained by
an infinite series of contingent causes, or else there is no expla-
nation to be sought in the realm of contingent being. An
infinite series, were it possible, would provide us with no
explanation, and, worse than all else for this solution, an in-


3i8 REALITY AND TRUTH
finite series of contingent causes does not and could not exist.
The ultimate explanation of things that are changeful and con-
tingent can be sought in nothing but a cause which is change-
less and necessary. Outside the series of all the causes that
we see and measure, there must exist a First Cause, Fount of all
activity and efficiency in the universe, upon which all other
agents ultimately depend. Once again, we give no proof. We
only suggest the outline of a method.
The procedure, it will be noted, is ever the same. We start
with the facts—here the insistent fact of change in all its
myriad forms. We apply our search-principle of causality: we
erect hypothesis: we dismiss those which fail to explain all the
facts: finally we are led by the pressure of the facts to the
conclusion that God exists. The method of the philosopher
stands revealed.
Philosophy Is Eminently Possible.
In considering the possibility of science we were able to
indicate and justify one pivoting principle in the inductive pro-
cess. There is no great synthetic principle of a similar kind
peculiar to philosophy. The philosopher employs all the prin-
ciples and all the methods of the many sciences, accepting and
welcoming all facts and all the partial explanations that go to
make his last mighty synthesis of the whole. By dint of much
labour, by the interplay of many methods, by the use of every
valid form of proof and argument, by a sustained and piercing
inquiry into what is ultimate and constitutive in things, the
philosopher consolidates knowledge and discovers new truths.
Somewhere in one of his poems Browning remarked,
Only by looking low ere looking high
Comes penetration of the mystery.
The words convey a profound truth. To them we may add as
a supplement, "but only by looking high after looking low
comes solution of the mystery ".
Now by looking high, now by looking low, by omitting


POSSIBILITY OF SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY 319
nothing, by scanning all things, the philosopher moves slowly
to his conclusions. In his hands knowledge gradually gives
way to wisdom, and science to philosophy.
We stand on the mountain-peaks, straining our eyes towards
the East whence Light shall emerge. As the first grey rays
stream over the horizon our minds rejoice: we grow contented
as in the strong white light we perceive the world lying at our
feet, solemn, mysterious, enthralling. Yet, as the wide-flung
splendours of earth and heaven are seen in the crystal of philo-
sophy, we begin to long incontinently for a deeper and fuller
understanding. Our minds restlessly await the Great Illumina-
tion, when all the indirectness of our Knowledge shall at last
have yielded to the immediacy of Vision.
FINIS.





INDEX.
[Books are mentioned under Authors' names.]
Ach's Theory to explain differences
between Sensation and Intel-
lect, 157-59.
Activities:
coincidence of, is the mode of
Knowledge, 213, 214.
ours, include those of the beings
of which we have positive
Knowledge, 214.
of Real World inconstant and
seized by Sensation, 215.
Adaptability:
the Pragmatist criterion of Truth,
232.
useful as a secondary criterion,
240-41.
See also Criterion.
Anselmian argument for the exis-
tence of God.
Descartes' adaptation of, 75, 76.
refutation of Descartes' adaptation
of, 76.
Anti-Intellectualism. See Bergson.
Antinomies of the Pure Reason:
Kant's chapter on, quoted as ex-
ample of the Isostheneia, 32.
in Kant's system, 264-65.
problem of God's existence
quoted as an example of, 265.
fallacy underlying, 265.
A priori mental processes and equip-
ment. See Kant.
Aristotle:
views on the Origin of Ideas, con-
trasted with those of Plato,
25-
teaching of, on difference between
Intellect and Sense adopted
by Mediaeval Philosophers,
140.
Aristotle (cont.)—
his Theory on the Mode of Know-
ledge,
quoted from " De Anima," 206.
taken broadly is justified, 208.
detailed treatment of, 213-14.
starts from Democritan Theory,
213-
asserts coincidence of Activities
not Migration of Forms,
213-14.
justified, 214.
categories of, distinguished from
those of Kant, 248.
his Theory on the Mode of Know-
ledge a check to Kant's Limi-
tation of Knowledge, 286.
Associations:
Ach's Theory of, to explain dif-
ferences between Sensation
and Intellect, 157-59.
Authority:
suggested as criterion of Truth,
23i-
cannot be criterion of Truth,
236-37.
Bacon, Roger:
his criterion of Truth, tradition,
inadmissible, 237.
Balmes:
exposition of his Dogmatism,
51-54-
views on the object of Philo-
sophy, 52.
attitude towards Scepticism,
52-
takes up Cartesian quest for one
primordial Truth, 52.
views on Truth, 53.
321
21


322
REALITY AND TRUTH
Balmes: exposition of his Dogma-
tism (cont.)—
solution of the Cartesian prob-
lem, 53-54.
methods of acquiring Know-
ledge, 54.
the "principles" of his Philo-
sophy, 54.
his "Intellectual Instinct" or
"Intuition," 54.
criticism of his Philosophy, 55-56.
Belief:
inadmissible as criterion of Truth,
236-37-
always implies an act of the Will,
237-
must be based on Knowledge, 237.
Bergson:
his system expounded, 209-n.
intellectual weaknesses and
pretensions, 209-11.
substitution of "Intuition" in
place of Intellect in Specula-
tive Work, 2n.
his books quoted, 209-n,
passim.
criticism, 211-12.
Berkeley:
his criticism of Locke's views
on the possibility of general
concepts, 25.
criticized by Balmes, 52.
Bevan: his " Stoics and Sceptics"
quoted ai ropos ol Dogmatism, 51.
Blurred Image Theory, as explana-
tion of differences between
Concepts and Sensations,
expounded, 154-55.
criticized, 156-57.
Burnet: his "Greek Philosophy"
quoted on Democritus, 213.
Caird: his "Philosophy of Kant"
quoted, 248, 260.
Carneades:
his Theory of Probability as a
Sceptical Guide in Practical
Life, 39.
his Theory of Probability refuted,
43-46-
Cartesianism. See Descartes.
Categorical Imperative. See Kant.
Categories. See Aristotle and Kant.
Causality, principle of:
used by Crude Realism to answer
difficulties, II.
criticism of Crude Realist's use of,
11-12.
no justification of, given, 11.
general experience cannot
prove, II.
it is not an axiom, 12.
nor justifiable by widespread
belief in it, 12.
prejudice in its application, 12.
justified in Critical Realism,
101-13.
its importance, 101.
tacit acceptation of, in ordinary
life, 101-2.
it attempts to explain change,
103-5.
statement of, 15.
not a First Principle, 105, and
may be doubted, 105.
nexus with the Principle of
Contradiction, 106.
can neither be doubted nor de-
nied, in consequence, 106-7.
extent of its applicability, 107.
objections against, 107-13.
said to contradict Principle of
Contradiction, 109.
answer to this, no.
the factor of Time with regard
to its nexus with the Principle
of Contradiction, 110-12.
not based on assumption of ex-
istence of Real World, 113.
Its use in Critical Realism:
wrecks Solipsism, 117-20.
applied to Conscious States,
121-27, to Sensation, 124-27.
aUack on its use by Critical
Realism, 126.
particular restatement of, gives
Critical Realist's view of sen-
sorial data, 172-74.
used to justify validity of con-
ceptial process, r74-8o.
at the base of all our knowledge
of the Real World, 192.
used to justify Existential
Judgments, 228.
can only be justified by Metho-
dic Doubt, 296.


INDEX
323
Change:
in Sensation difficulty against
Crude Realism, 6-9.
universality of, 2, 103-4.
Principle of Causality, attempts to
explain, 103-4.
not a Transcendental, 105.
defined, 109.
in Conscious States, at the base
of Critical Realism, 120-42.
in Sensation and Intellect ex-
plained in Critical Realism,
180-91.
Bergson's views on, and on In-
tellect's inability to grasp,
209-11.
Science and Philosophy seek for
recurrence and order in, 249.
Coherence:
Idealist criterion of Truth, 232.
useful as a secondary criterion,
24r.
Common-sense of mankind:
suggested by some as criterion of
Truth, 231.
a complex in part of Feeling and
of Will and therefore inadmis-
sible as criterion of Truth,
237.
Comprehensiveness:
Idealist criterion of Truth, 232.
useful as secondary criterion, 241.
Concepts:
Locke, Hamilton, and Berkeley
on, 25.
differ radically from Sensations,
146-59.
attempts to explain differences
between Sensations and, 154-
59-
Causality, principle of: its use in
Critical Realism (cont.)—
the search-principle of Phil-
osophy, 311-18.
Its use in Kantian system. See
Kant.
Causality, Theory of:
touchstone of, the worth of any
Philosophy, 286-87.
See also Kant, and Causality, Prin-
ciple of.
Certainty distinguished from Certi-
tude, 217.
Certitude:
the desire of the Dogmatist, 48.
existence of, even though inde-
fensible, the starting-point
of Critical Realism, 83.
Problems of, and their origin,
216-17.
described, 217-22.
a quality of a frame of mind,
217.
defined as mental repose, 217.
excludes all doubt and denial,
217.
one in kind, 218.
classification of, based on differ-
ence in subject matter of, 219.
Kinds of, dismissed, 219.
Moral Certitude, bad termin-
ology, 219.
may alter, 219.
no degrees of, 219-20.
value and grounds of, admit of
degrees, 220.
may be divided according as
they rest on Intrinsic or Ex-
trinsic evidence, 220-22.
of Extrinsic Evidence rest on
Intrinsic Evidence, 222.
validity of, bound up with
problems of Truth, 222-23.
no special criterion for, 222-23.
Evidence the criterion of, 241-
42.
of Intrinsic Evidence tested in
same way as Truth, 242.
of Extrinsic Evidence, scrutin-
ized carefully, justifiable, 242.
Will's part in making of, is
attention and Concentration
of the Intellect, 243-44.
generality of, 160-62.
sta ility and communicability of,
162-64.
diversity in applications of Sensa-
tions and, 164-66.
neither true nor false in them-
selves, 109.
question of validity arises, when
applied to Real World, 170.
the information they give us, 174-
75-
applicability of, to Real World,
174-80.


324
REALITY AND TRUTH
Concepts (cont.)—
two possible errors in application
of, 176-78.
remedy against these errors, 178-
80.
with care may be validly applied
to Real World, 180.
of the Immaterial, possible, 195-
96.
conformity between, expressed in
Logical Truth, 228.
difficulty of relating universal
concepts to particular Reality,
254.
may be valid representations of
"natures," 296.
See also Ideas, Intellect, Con-
sciousness of Meaning and
Knowledge.
Consciousness:
the sum-total of all we know, 14.
contents of, in themselves do not
justify belief in Real World,
14.
nor in the existence of a Self, 14.
two levels in, 36.
has power of self-examination,
36-
Conscious States: changefulness of,
and application of Principle of
Causality to (cent.)—
cannot themselves stimulate
Sensations, 124-25.
do not exhaust the contents of
Reality, 125.
a Person is not sole stimulus of,
128-33.
Immaterial Spirit or Force or
Energy is not stimulus of,
I33-4I-
Real World alone is sufficient
stimulus of, 142.
Consensus Generis Humani:
used by many as criterion of
Truth, 231.
cannot so be used, 275.
Contradiction, Principle of:
statement of, 83.
its transcendental nature, 86-89.
Methodic Doubt applied to, 92-
95-
indubitable and undeniable, 94-
95-
Methodic Doubt of Descrates ap-
plied to contents of, 69-70.
Knowledge never passes beyond
limits of, 168.
analysed by Hume into Impres-
sions and Ideas, 254.
Consciousness of Meaning:
caused in us by concepts of words
we know and understand,
14853-
distinct from Imagery Associations
or Feelings, 150.
See also Concepts.
Conscious States:
impossibility of doubting their
existence, 72.
this impossibility the starting-
point of Critical Realism, 83.
changefulness of, and application
of Principle of Causality to,
120-27.
can they elicit each other, 121-
22.
Sensation the sufficient stimu-
lus of, 122-24.
logically implied in every judg-
ment, 95-96.
supported by experience, 96.
nexus with the Principle of Caus-
ality, 106-7.
said to be contradicted by Prin-
ciple of Causality, 109.
answer to this, no.
should not contain mention of
Time, 110-12.
application to problem of Real
World, 119.
Correspondence:
of thought and object, Criterion
of Truth of Crude Realism,
16, 17, 232.
impossible as criterion, 16, 17.
Cosmology: the philosophy of phy-
sical sciences, 311.
Criterion of Truth and Knowledge:
need of one, 16.
Correspondence Theory of Crude
Realism, 16-17.
Cartesian, 73-74. 239. 296.
no special, for Certitudes, 222-23.
of Truth, 231-41.
variety of criteria suggested
by philosophers, 231, 232.


INDEX
3*5
Criterion of Truth and Knowledge:
of Truth (cont.)—
notes of real criterion of Truth,
232-35.
"trans - subjectivity" the
breaker of systems, 235-37.
evidence the real criterion, 237-
40.
evidence has three notes of a
real criterion, 239.
secondary criteria of Truth,
240-41.
evidence, test of Truth, second-
ary criteria test of proba-
bility, 241.
evidence the criterion of Certi-
tude, 241-42.
evidence often neglected by philo-
sophers, and this accounts
for many failures, 245.
Kantian criterion. See Kant.
Criticism: the only via media be-
tween Scepticism and Dogma-
tism, 66.
de Bonald: his criterion of Truth,
tradition, inadmissible, 237.
Deduction. See Intellect.
de Lammenais, his criterion of
Truth, authority, inadmis-
sible, 236-37.
Democritus:
his Theory of Knowledge based
on Leucippos' Metaphysics,
213. »
ttSuKa, particles of Reality, im-
pounded by Sensation, the
means by which we know
Reality, zr3.
contrasts "use" and " truth " in
Knowledge, 213.
Sensation gives " bastard " know-
ledge; "true-born" know-
ledge lies in the depths,
213-
his mistake a hopeful one, 213.
Descartes:
his search for one primordial
truth taken up by Balmes,
52-54-
his life and work, and its impor-
tance, 66-67.
characteristics of, 67.
Descartes (cont.)—
his search is for one Certitude the
source of all others, 67, 68.
statement of his Theory of Know-
ledge, 68-74.
reduces all problems to their
simplest factors, 68.
his Methodic Doubt and its use,
68-70.
discovers only one truth beyond
its reach," cogito ergo sum,"
explanation of his " cogito ergo
sum," 71-72.
his faulty use of his first prin-
ciple, 73-74.
his criterion of Truth, 73, 74.
common use of his criterion, 74.
criticism of his Theory, 74-78.
his criterion of Truth impos-
sible, 74-75. 239. 29°-
his adaptation of Anselmian ar-
gument for God's existence,
75 -7°.
criticism of this adaptation, 76.
his system, a circular one, 76-77.
summary of his Theory, and its
utility, 77-78.
regarded extension as Essence of
Matter, 172.
Dogmatism:
description of, 20-21, 47-48.
attitude towards Scepticism, 47-
48.
attitude towards Scandal of Philo-
sophy, 48.
temperamental factor in, 48-51.
desires Certitude and fears Doubt,
48-49.
parallel with Scepticism, 49.
desires peace and freedom from
strife of thought, 49-51.
Balmes' system, 51-56.
Palmieri's system, 56-59.
Critique of, 59-65.
jumps from Psychology to
Metaphysics, 62.
assumes existence of Self, 63.
really based on Crude Realism
(q.v.), 64.
its cause good , its defence bad,
65.
See also Balmes, Palmicri.


3*6
REALITY AND TRUTH
Doubt. See Methodic Doubt, Scep-
ticism.
Eclecticism, so.
Emotions:
for Hume, form with "Impres-
sions" sum-total ofi Know-
ledge, 255.
cannot validity Induction, 304-5.
See also Feeling.
Empiricism. Sec Hume.
Energy: is not sole extra-mental
Reality, 133-41.
Ether:
modern theories on, increase the
difficulties of Crude Realism,
18.
our knowledge of, negative and
analogical, 197.
Ethics: in Kant's system beyond
the control of Speculative
Reason, 266.
Evidence:
in Balmes' Dogmatism, 54.
forms a base for division of Cer-
titude, 220-22.
may be Extrinsic or Intrinsic,
220-21.
ultimately Extrinsic evidence rests
on Intrinsic, 222.
the criterion of Truth, in Critical
Realism, 237-40.
fulfils three conditions for a real
criterion, 239*_
1
the criterion of Certitude, 241-42.
as criterion of Truth often ne-
glected by Philosophy; and
the results of this neglect,
245.
cannot prove fundamental and
■ immediate principles, 296;
but may prove such imme-
diate judgments, as are not
needed in order to prove the
existence of a Real World,
296-97.
Excluded Middle, Principle of:
statement of, 83.
its transcendental nature, 86-89.
metaphysical and logical state-
ments of, 97.
its "logical" implication in all
judgments, 97.
Excluded Middle, Principle of
(cont.)—
Methodic Doubt applied to, 97-
98.
indubitable and undeniable, 98.
application of, to the problem of
the existence of a Real World,
119.
Experience:
its place in Knowledge, 176.
the remedy against errors in ap-
plication of Concepts to Real-
ity, 178-80.
not transmissible, 200-4.
Law governing Expansion of, 202.
non-transmissibiliiy of, corrobor-
ated by characteristics of In-
tellect and Senses; and by
history, national and individ-
ual, 203-4.
Past and Present, connected in
Ontological Truth, 225-26.
conceptual process, and Reason
and Judgment dependent on,
279-81.
and the problem of Induction,
301-3-
See also Kant and Hume.
Extension:
importance of this impression, 172.
Descartes thought it the Essence
of Matter, 172.
Locke thought it a " real primary"
quality, 172, and Space, 173.
defined by Divisibility of Matter,
173-
of things unseen and unfelt known
by analogy, 173-74-
Critical Realism explains Impres-
sion of, as particular re-asser-
tion of Principle of Causality,
174-
Facts: their place in Philosophy,
31418.
Faith:
the foundation of much of our
knowledge, 221-22.
suggested by some as only means
of Knowledge, 231.
an act of, lies at base of Kant's
Philosophy of "Practical
Reason," 267.


INDEX
327
Feelings:
of Activity and Passivity, Psycho-
logical discussion of, 129-31.
of Passivity, and the hypothesis
of a Person as sole extra-
mental Reality, 132-33.
immediacy of, suggested by some
as criterion of Truth, 231.
being subjective neither they nor
a complex of them, admis-
sibles as criterion of Truth,
235-37-
Kant in his Critique of the " Prac-
tical Reason " allows them to
play a part in philosophic in-
quiry, 293.
cannot validity Induction.
Sec also Emotion.
Fichte: Balmes' criticism of, 52.
Fideism:
Blind Faith the only means of
knowing, 231.
Authority, its criterion of Truth,
231.
its criterion impossible, 236-37.
First Principles:
Certitudes, yet indemonstrable,
83-
their transcendental nature, 86-
89.
identified by Greek philosophers
with Laws of Thought, 88-
89.
See also Contradiction, Excluded
Middle, Identity.
Force is not sole extra-mental
Reality, 133-41.
Forms. See Activities, Aristotle.
God:
Descartes' proof of the existence
of, 75-76.
our knowledge of negative and
analogical, 196-97.
Kant's " Idea " of. See Kant,
method of Philosophy in dealing
with problem of existence of,
317-18.
Hallucination, as difficulty against
valid knowledge answered in
Critical Realism, 190-91.
Hamilton criticizes Locke's views
on Concepts, 28.
Heine, quoted apropos of Kant's in-
fluence, 271-72.
Herz, Kant's letter to, quoted
apropos of "chaotic mani-
fold " of Sensation, 248.
History, its criterion of Truth, that
of Critical Realism, 244-45.
Humanism:
its criterion of Truth—utility and
adaptability, 232.
useful as a secondary criterion,
240-41.
Human Soul:
in Crude Realism, 4.
is somehow what it knows,
214.
Immortality of, method of Phil-
osophy in dealing with, 314-
*7-
for Kantian "Idea" of, and
proof of Immortality of, see
Kant.
Hume:
treatment he received from
Balmes, 52.
restates old Greek difficulties
against Universal Knowledge,
254.
analyses Consciousness into " Im-
pressions " and" Ideas," 254.
his views on " Impressions" and
"Ideas," 255.
divides " Impressions" into Sen-
sations and Emotions, 255.
limits all knowledge to Sensations
and Emotions, therefore
denies all possibility of justi-
fying universal statements,
255- . .
condemns Metaphysics, in quota-
tion from " Enquiry Concern-
ing Human Understanding,"
262.
his scepticism with regard to
Speculative Reason, 263.
bases "Induction'' on Memory,
and therefore probably but
not certainly justifiable, 303-
*-
answer to his views on Induction,
304-5.


328
REALITY AND TRUTH
Hume and Kant:
his influence on, by statement of
the difficulties against Uni-
versal Knowledge, 254.
Kant reacts against his Theory of
Knowledge but is influenced
by it, 255-56.
Kant's answer to his difficulties,
259.
his influence on Kant, the latter's
theory making his own more
precise, 263.
Kant's "Critique of the Pure
Reason " a desperate attempt
to answer his Empiricism,
272.
awakens Kant from "Dogma-
tism," 275.
"Critique of the Pure Reason"
shows his influence, 291.
Huxley:
his advice on Illusions quoted,
189-90 (note).
his " Hume " quoted to illustrate
his Own and Hume's views
on Induction, 303.
answer to his views on Induction,
304-5-
Idealism: an ill-used Term, 215.
its criteria of Truth, 232.
those criteria useful as secondary
criteria, 241.
Ideas, Origin of:
Aristotle and Plato on, 25.
is in Matter, 134-41.
Hume regards images of Impres-
sions as, 255.
Theory on, a touchstone of any
philosophy, 286.
Ideas. See Kant, Concept, Intellect.
Identity, Principle of:
statement of, 83.
its transcendental nature, 86-8g.
Methodic Doubt applied to, 8g-g2.
possible attack of Scepticism on,
90-92.
indubitable, 92.
at the base of Inductive Reason-
ing. 307-8.
Illusions as difficulty against Valid
Knowledge answered in Criti-
cal Realism, 187-90.
Imagery:
unquestioned use of, by the Crude
Realist, 3.
with Sensation the only existence
of which we have direct know-
ledge, 10.
its part in the Thought-Process,
148-54, passim.
its dependence upon the "Con-
sciousness of Meaning" for
significance, 157.
fleeting and inconstant, 163.
of the Immaterial is impossible,
195.
Immaterial:
cannot be perceived, but can be
conceived, 195-96.
our knowledge of, negative or
analogical, 196-97.
Impressions. See Hume and Sen-
sation.
Induction. See Intellect.
Intellect:
difference between Sensation and
a great philosophic debate,
145-46.
regarded by some philosophers as
a development of Sensation,
146.
different from Sensation, 146-59.
outstanding differences between
Sensation and, 160-66.
its generality, and the particu-
larity of Sensation, 160-62.
stability and communicability
of its data, 162-64.
diversity in application of data
of Sensation, 164-66.
purports to give information
concerning Natures, 164-66.
information given by concepts,
174-75-
two possible errors in application
of Concepts, 176-78.
Concepts applicable to Real
World, 176-80.
its dependence on Sensation, 194.
can conceive the Immaterial, 195-
197.
no direct communion with an-
other's, ig8-2oo.
Bergson's views on, 2og-i2. See
Bergson.


INDEX
329
Intellect (cont.)—
seizes the relatively constant
nature of things, 215.
guided and concentrated by the
Will in the making of Certi-
tudes, 243-44.
justification of universalizing
action of, 279-81.
dependence of, on experience,
279-83.
Science and Philosophy depend
upon validity of Reasoning
process, 296-97.
justification of Reasoning process,
297-308.
Reasoning of two kinds, Deduc-
tive and Inductive, 298.
nature of Deduction, 298-99.
justification of Deduction, 299-
30o-
nature of Induction and its im-
portance, 300-3.
problem of possibility of Induc-
tion, 300-1.
all our knowledge nearly, depends
on the validity of Induction,
301-2.
views of Hume, Huxley, and Kant
(q.v.) on Induction, 303-5.
Induction not merely probable
but true, 305-8.
summary of Intellectual Know-
ledge, 305-6.
its use to justify Induction, 306-8.
Induction depends upon Principle
of Identity, 307-8.
canons of Induction obviate mis-
takes, 308.
Intellectualism: Bergson's attack
on, 209-n.
Critical Realism and, 242-43.
Intelligence. See Intellect.
Introspection, its findings and limi-
tations, 60-61.
of Thought-Process, 148-54.
Intuition: Balmes' Intellectual In-
stinct, etc., Intuition, 54.
Bergson's philosophical instru-
ment, 211.
suggested as criterion of Truth,
by some, 231.
cannot prove Immediate Judg-
ments, 296.
Intuitionism:
expounded, 118-20.
interprets experience, 119.
cannot be wrecked by internal
critique, 119.
Isostheneia:
an argument in favour of Scepti-
cism, 29.
criticism of, 32.
used against Scepticism, 45.
See also Antinomies, Kant.
Jacobi:
his criterion of Truth inadmissible,
235.
his remark concerning ultimate
reality, and the speculative
reason quoted, 267.
Je pense, done je suis, on je pense
j'existe. See Descartes under
"Cogito ergo sum ".
Judgments:
as cause of Epistemological Prob-
lems, 6.
nature of, 79-85.
analysis into Mediate and Imme-
diate, 80.
discussion of Mediate, 80.
dependence of Mediate on Im-
mediate, 81.
Immediate the most important
element of our knowledge,
82.
Immediate are indemonstrable,
82-83.
Principle of Contradiction logic-
ally implied in all, 95-96.
logical implication of Principle of
Excluded Middle in all, 97.
validity of, follows from careful
application of Principle of
Causality, 183-90.
hastily made, source of error, 188,
189-90.
stringent conditions of validity of,
189-90.
rough classification of, 227.
two kinds of, Existential, Quali-
tative, 227.
Existential state, existence of
something, 228.
Qualitative, link two terms, 228.


33°
REALITY AND TRUTH
Judgments (cont.)—
Existential judgments depend on
Validity of Knowledge and
Principle of Causality, 228.
Four types of, as bases of Kant's
"a priori" Categories, 251.
For other uses in Kant's system,
see Kant,
Mediate depend upon Reasoning
Process, 297.
Immediate
cannot be proved, by Evidence,
Intuition, or Cartesian cri-
terion, 29 \
Laws of Thought and Principle
of Causality can only be justi-
fied by Methodic Doubt, 296.
others such as Axioms can be
tested by appeal to experience
or by Methodic Doubt, 296-
97-
Truth of. See Truth, logical.
Kant:
his position between Scepticism
and Dogmatism, 22.
his postulates of the "Practical
Reason" inadmissible as
criteria of Truth, 230.
importance of his philosophy, 246-
247.
its influence, as source of Ag-
nosticism and Scepticism, 246.
its crippling effect on Reason,
246-47.
his Theory of Knowledge ex-
pounded, 246-72.
experience a function of one
variable and one constant,
247-48.
Sensation—the variable, and
"a priori" mental-equip-
ment, the constant, 247-48.
his doctrine of the "chaotic
manifold" of Sensation, 248.
an "a priori Form " in Kant's
Philosophy, 248.
bases his system on "a priori"
mental processes and equip-
ment, 248-50.
his " a priori " Forms and Cate-
gories, their nature and work,
248-49,
Kant: his Theory of Knowledge
expounded (cont.)—
his "Copernican Revolution"
in philosophy—the turning
of study on to the mind in-
stead of out on to Reality,
249-50.
the understanding is the source
of the laws of Nature, 249-50.
work of "a priori" processes
on "chaotic manifold" of
Sensation, 250.
"a priori" processes indepen-
dent of experience. 250.
with "chaotic manifold" form
our Knowledge, 250.
mould experience into an intel-
ligible synthesis, 250.
an " a priori Form " or Intuition
for Kant, independent of ex-
perience, 250.
inventory and division of "a
priori" equipment, 250-52.
instance of use of, 251-52.
form of inner experience, 252.
necessity of the work of "a
priori" processes, 252-53.
his point of view in Theory of
Knowledge based on old
Greek problem of justification
of universal laws, 254-55.
reacted against Hume but in-
fluenced by him, 255.
"a priori" mental equipment
justified by its necessity, to
justify universality of intel-
lectual operations, 256-57.
his criterion of valid " a priori"
Knowledge, 257.
division of judgments, 257.
synthetic " a priori "judgments,
257-259.
his answer to Hume on the
question of universal know-
ledge, 259.
his defence of his Theory of
"a priori" mental equip-
ment, 259-62.
experience needs organizing
into united whole, 260-61.
"a priori " Forms and Cate-
gories needed for this and
therefore justified, 260-62.


INDEX
33i
Kant: his Theory of Knowledge
expounded: his defence of his
Theory of "a priori" mental
equipment (cont.)—
summing up of this defence
—its defects, 261-62.
Limitations of Knowledge, 262-
65.
Kant: his Theory of Knowledge
expounded (cont.)—
necessity of the Freedom of
the Will, 268.
Immortality of the soul de-
manded by Categorical Im-
perative, 268-69.
God, a necessary postulate of
the Categorical Imperative,
269.
postulates of Practical Reason
cannot be proven, but must
be accepted by an act of the
Will, 269-70.
summary of his system, 270-
72.
Criticism of his system and paral-
lel with Critical Realism,
273-94-
fails to secure his object, 273.
no real justification of "a
priori" mental processes of-
fered, 273-75.
Consensus generis humani does
not justify them, 275.
no justification of "a priori"
processes possible, 275-77.
his "Critique of the Pure
Reason," a desperate defence
against Hume, 277.
his Theory of Knowledge
answered by constructive
work of Critical Realism, 277-
79-
bound 10 sense entirely, 262.
Reason's work,—to prevent
Knowledge straying, 262.
his "Great Renunciation,"
263-65.
- reasons for limiting Know-
ledge to Sensation, 263.
fuller exposition of his views
on limitation of Know-
ledge, 263-67.
Noumena beyond our cogni-
tion, 263.
his theory leads to condemna-
tion of Speculative Reason,
263-65.
thrte "Ideas" used by
Reason in its attempt to
grasp natures or noumena,
264.
these " Ideas " necessary and
useful but indemonstrable,
264-65.
fallacy underlying his limita-
tion of Knowledge, 265.
Speculative Reason has only
regulative duty, 265-67.
Metaphysic can neither prove
nor disprove Religion or
Ethics, 266.
in "Critique of the Practical
Reason, gives his system of
Ethics, 267.
problems of Religion and prac-
tical life, only soluble by an
act of Faith in postulates of
Practical Reason, 267.
fundamental law of the Practi
cal Reason promulgated by
the Categorical Imperative,
267-68.
his travesty of Principle of
Morality, 267.
influence of Pietism on, 268.
three postulates of the Cate-
gorical Imperative, 268.
"a priori" mental processes
unnecessary, 277-79.
his views on Experience and
his recoil from it unnecessary,
281.
his theory insufficient and un-
necessary, 281.
his " Great Renunciation " made
in error, 281-82.
limitations of Knowledge, 282.
limitations of Knowledge really
an instance of Dogmatism,
282.
bases of his limitation of Know-
ledge refuted, 282-83.
his separation of Noumena from
Phenomena, 285.
Aristotle's doctrine on Mode of
Knowledge a check to, 286.


332
REALITY AND TRUTH
Kant: Criticism of his system and
parallel with Critical Realism
(cont.)—
his Theory of Causality false,
286-89.
he limits application of Prin-
ciple of Causality to pheno-
mena, 287.
but, his whole "a priori"
system is untenable, 288.
constructive work of Critical
Reali m answers him, 288-89.
Contrast between his system and
Critical Realism, 289-90.
for Kant Knowledge dependent
on " a priori" processes; for
Realism Knowledge depen-
dent on experience, 289-90.
Kant limited Knowledge to
phenomena, Realism does
not deny the possibility of
indirect Knowledge of ulti-
mate Reality, 2go.
for Kant, Causality on "a
priori" Category applicable
only to phenomena, Realism
regards it as a real Ontologi-
cal principle applicable to all
change, 290.
his '■ Critique of the Practical
Reason," its thesis excellent,
its methods and proofs im-
possible, 291.
short summary of, 291.
"Critique of the Pure Reason"
rejected for unproven Scep-
ticism, 291.
"Critique of the Practical
Reason" rejected for Dog-
matism, 291.
Categorical Imperative does
argue Freedom of the Will
in moral actions, 291-92.
Categorical Imperative only a
"suasio" for Immortality of
the Soul, 292.
Categorical Imperative does not
prove existence of God, 292-
93-
he tries to solve speculative
problems without speculative
Reason and allows Feeling
and Will to play a part, 293.
Kant: Criticism of his system and
parallel with Critical Realism
(cont.)—
in "Practical Reason" his
cause is good, his defence
inacceptable, 293.
his views on Induction, 304-5.
Knowledge:
difficulties igainst, valid, 6-16.
based on changes in Sensation,
6-9.
based on its necessary confine-
ment to Consciousness, 14.
necessity of Criterion of, 16.
Correspondence Theory of Crude
Realism, 16-17.
discrepancies in, an argument in
favour of Scepticism, 27, 28.
its inability to discuss its own
validity, an argument in
favour of Scepticism, 28, 29.
refutation of the argument based
on discrepancies, 32-35.
refutation of its supposed inabil-
ity to criticize its own validity,
35-3°-
Methods of acquiring, of Balmes,
54-
Analysed into " facts" and judg-
ments, 78, 7g.
Discussion of facts of—Sensations
and Concepts, 79.
Nature of judgments, 79-85.
analysis into Mediate and Im-
mediate, 80.
Mediate dependent upon Im-
mediate, 80-82.
Immediate Judgments, 82-85.
Discussion of means of, 143-66.
two distinct processes of—In-
tellect and Sense (q.v.), 145-
59-
its limits wider than those of
our powers of expression, 162.
Discussion of the validity of, 167-
92.
Limitation of, 168.
meaning of the problem of the
validity of, 169-70.
discussion of particular cases of
knowledge, 170-74.
Colour, 170-72; Extension,
172-74.


INDEX
333
Knowledge: Nature and Scope of
(cont.)—
Law of Knowledge, demands
similarity between knowing
person and known object,
204-5.
Fact behind this Law, 205-8.
an internal experience, 205.
Aristotelian Theory on the
manner of, stated, 206.
our knowledge of Matter inor-
ganic and organic, 207-8.
we are somehow what we know,
208-9.
Theories on the manner of, 213-
14-
Democritus, 213.
Aristotle, his theory, tj tyxv
ra tirr* *6s iari trayra,
accepted, 213-14.
Summary of the Laws of, 214-
15-
Knowledge: Discussion of the va-
lidity of (cont.) -
Critical Realist's view of sen-
sorial data only a particular re-
assertion of Principle of Caus-
ality, 17a, 173-74.
applicability of Concepts to
Real World, 174-80.
Concepts may with care be
validly applied to Reality, 180.
symbolic summary of findings
with regard to Valid Know-
ledge, 180-81.
we only know what things are
by what they do, i8r.
difficulties against, as treated
in Critical Realism, iSr-cji.
the Colour Difficulty, 181-83.
the Shape Difficulty, 183-87.
Difficulty of Illusions, 187-90.
Difficulty of Hallucinations,
190-91.
Summary of Discussion, and
conclusions drawn from it,
191-92.
Open to question unless its
bases in sense-experience
are tested and verified, 191.
natures and qualities of thing,
may be validly though in-
directly known, by appli-
cation of Principle of Caus-
ality, 192.
Nature and Scope of, 193-215.
Problem stated, 193-94.
sense-bound, 194-95.
Intellect depends on Sensation,
194.
w " can know positively Matter
only, 195.
the Immaterial we can only
know negatively or analogi-
cally by the conceptual pro-
cess, 195-97.
our powers of entering into
another's Knowledge, 197-
204.
no direct communion of mind
and mind, 198.
Thoughts of others produced
not reproduced, 199.
experience not transmissible,
203-4.
Intellect seizes natures—rela-
tively constant, 215.
Sensation seizes the inconstant
activities, 215.
Platonic Tradition fixes gulf be-
tween Reality and, 278.
dependence of all knowledge on
experience, 279-83.
sensations and concepts may be
valid representations of pro-
perties and natures, 295-90.
Immediate Judgments—inde-
monstrable, 296.
Laws of Thought and Principle
of Causality can only be justi-
fied by Methodic Doubt, 296.
Other Immediate Judgments,
not used in proof of the Real
World, may be justified by
an appeal to experience,
296-97.
Mediate Judgments dependupon
the Reasoning Process, 297.
Justification of Reasoning Pro-
cess, 297-308; see also In-
tellect.
nearly the whole of, depends
upon the validity of Induction,
302.
summary of Intellectual Know-
ledge, 305-6.


334
REALITY AND TRUTH
Knowledge (cont.)—
Problems of Certitude and Truth.
See under these headings.
Problem of universality of, as
posed by the Greeks, 254 ; see
also Kant, Hume,
for Kantian views on, see Kant
,
See also Hume, Bergson,
Descartes, Democritus, Aris-
totle, Intellect, Experience,
Certitude, Truth, Concept,
Sensation.
Knowledge, Theory of. See Theory
of Knowledge.
Kulpe quoted apropos of Kant's
Limitations of Knowledge, 281-82.
Laws. See under Knowledge,
Science, Philosophy, Realism,
Critical.
Law, the criterion of Truth of
Critical Realism is that of,
* 14-45-
Leucippos, the master of Demo-
critus, 213.
Life, Necessity of a Theory of
Practical, 38.
Sceptical Theories of Practical.
Sec Scepticism,
all Practical, depends on Induc-
tion, 302.
for Bergson's views on, see
Bergson.
Local Conventions, Theory based
on, as Sceptic's guide for
Practical Life, 39.
Theory based on, criticized, 40-43.
Locke's views on Concepts, 25.
follows Cartesian tradition in his
views on Matter, 172.
Mathematics, in Kant's view, con-
stituted of synthetic '' a
priori " judgments, 258.
Matter, modern scientific view of,
as difficulty for Crude Real-
ism, 18.
Extension of, 173.
and Space, 173.
meaning of, 175.
our mode of knowing, 175.
the only being we can know posi-
tively, 195.
Matter (cont.)—
divisions of, and our knowledge of
each, 206-8.
See also Reality.
Memory, as basis for Induction ac-
cording to Hume, Huxley,
and Kant, 303-4.
while merely sensuous cannot
arrive at generality, 303-4.
residue of Sensation and Experi-
ence, 303-5.
only yields probability of In-
duction not certainty of,
303-4-
Metaphysic:
transition to, from Psychology
through Theory of Know-
ledge, 32.
described, 86-87.
Leucippos' Theory of Atoms and
Void, 213.
constituted according to Kant of
synthetic "a priori" judg-
ments, 258.
Hume's condemnation of, quoted,
263.
in Kant's system, cannot prove
or disprove Religion or
Ethics, 266.
in Kant's system can only declare
ultimate Reality beyond the
reach of Pure Reason, 266.
modern scientific attitude to, and
reasons for this, 309-11.
justified, 318-19.
Methodic Doubt. Sec Descartes,
Realism, Critical.
Mind. See Intellect.
Montaigne: his "Essais" quoted
in favour of Scepticism,
2S-29.
his argument against Valid Know-
ledge, 28-29.
his argument criticized, 35-36.
"Essais" quoted in support of
the "Local Conventions"
Theory, 39.
his " Local Conventions " Theory
refuted, 40-43.
Moral Certitude. See Certitude.
Morality, in Kant's system, Prin-
ciple of, must exclude all de-
sire for happiness, 267.


INDEX
335
Philosophy (cant.)—
two tendencies in, Scepticism and
Dogmatism, 20.
alternating periods in, 20.
scandal of, as factor in making of
a Sceptic, 23, 25, 26.
small progress of, 25.
scandal of, proves nothing against
possibility of Valid Know-
ledge, 30-32.
object of, 45.
scandal of, Dogmatist attitude to,
48.
Balmes' views on object of,
5i-
Nature: of Things can be validly
known but indirectly, 192.
of Things relatively constant, and
seized by Intellect, 215.
Laws of, asserted by Kant to find
their source in the Under-
standing, 249-50.
Laws of, Hume denies possibility
of justifying, 255.
Uniformity of, justified, 306-8.
Uniformity of, as basis of Induc-
tion, 306-8.
See also Reality, Realism, Critical,
Intellect, Concept.
Necessity, Kantian criterion of valid,
"a priori" Knowledge,
257-58.
New Academy, Sceptical School, 39.
Nietzsche quoted, on the Will, 244.
Noumena. See Kant, Nature.
Ontolooical argument for exis-
tence of God, Descartes'
adaptation of, 75-76.
criticism of Descartes' adapta-
tion of, 76.
Palmieri:
follows in the tradition of Balmes,
56.
attitude towards Scepticism,
56-57-
demonstrates the necessity of
self-evident propositions, 57.
three primitive Truths of, 57, 58.
contained implicitly in every
judgment, 58.
critique of his system, 58-63.
the three primitive Truths not
contained implicitly in every
judgment, 59-61.
jumps from Psychology to
Metaphysic, 62.
assumes the existence of Self,
63-
Pascal, quoted on discrepancies of
human Knowledge, 28.
Persons: Critical Realism justifies
belief in. 142.
our Knowledge of, 207-8.
Philosophy:
History of, overmuch stressed,
19.
state of, at time of Descartes, 66-
67.
under Descartes' Methodic Doubt,
68-69.
its frequent failures accounted
for, by its neglect of evidence
as criterion of Truth, 245.
seeks recurrence and order in
change, 249.
Copernican Revolution in, effected
by Kant, 249.
Kant's influence on, 271.
Kant's system, if accepted, ruins,
271.
endeavours to understand things
in their causes, passim.
all speculative work in, crippled
by Kant's limitations of Caus-
ality, 287-88.
possibility of, depends upon the
validity of the Reasoning
Process, 297.
importance of the validity of In-
duction to, 301.
possibility of, delended, 309-19.
modern prejudice against, and
reasons for it, 309.11.
takes data of Science and in-
quires into ultimate causes,
3"-
Principle of Causality, its search
principle, 311.
its consecrated problems, 311-
12.
Methods of, in dealing with
these problems, as ex-
amples of philosophic
work, 312-18.


336
REALITY AND TRUTH
Qualities:
Sensation purports to give in-
formation concerning, 164-66.
can be known validly but in-
directly, 192.
are not distinct from the nature,
but are connatural manifesta-
tions ot nature, 284-85.
we know natures by, 285.
Realism, Critical:
not mitigated Dogmatism, 79.
plan and method of, 78, 79.
first step, Analysis of Knowledge,
78-79.
Facts of Knowledge analysed
into Sensations and Concepts,
79-
Philosophy: possibility of, defended:
Methods of, in dealing with these
problems, as examples of philo-
sophic work (cont.)—
Freedom of the Will as dealt
with by Philosophy, 312-4.
Immortality of the Soul as
dealt with by Philosophy,
3I4-I7-
Existence of God as dealt
with by Philosophy, 317-8.
no great synthetic principle in,
but methods, principles, and
facts of Science used, 318.
possibility of, justified, 31S-19.
See also Realism, Dogmatism,
Scepticism, and under names
of Philosophers.
Pietism: its influence on Kant, 26S-
91.
Plato:
views on "Origin of Ideas" op-
posed to Aristotle's, 25.
tradition from, places gulf be-
tween Reality and Know-
ledge, 278.
Pragmatism:
its criteria of Truth, 232.
its criteria, useful as secondary
criteria, 240-41.
Probability:
Carneades' Sceptical Theory of
Practical Life based on, 39.
refuted, 43-46.
depends on Certitude, 43-44.
admits of degrees, 2ig.
secondary criteria of Truth are
test of, 241.
Protagoras:
his argument in favour of Scepti-
cism, 27.
criticism of, 32.
Psychology:
Transition to Metaphysics from,
is through Theory of Know-
ledge, 62.
Lemma on Feelings, 129-31.
Lemma on the two processes of
Knowledge, 146-59.
the philosophy of biological
Sciences, 311.
Pyrrho: criticism of, by Balmes,
52.
Judgments, Immediate and
Mediate, 80.
Discussion of Mediate Judgments,
80-82.
their dependence on Immediate,
81-82.
Immediate Judgments, 82-85.
Methodic Doubt applied to Prin-
ciple of Identity, 89-92.
applied to Principle of Con-
tradiction, 92-96.
applied to Principle of Excluded
Middle, 97-98.
Four Certitudes beyond the range
of doubt, 98.
this procedure attacked and de-
fended, 98-101.
said to assume validity of
reason, 98-99.
no assumption made, 98-99.
analogy between its methods,
and those of Experimental
Psychology, 100.
exigencies of language give rise
to appearance of assumption,
101.
Discussion of Principle of Causal-
ity, 101-12.
their acceptance in ordinary
life, 101-2.
attempts to explain change,
103-4.
possibility of doubting, 105.
defence, 106-7.


INDEX
337
Realism, Critical: Discussion of Prin-
ciple of Causality (cont.)—
connection with Principle of
Contradiction, 107.
extent of application, 107.
objections to Principle of
Causality, 107-13.
cannot contradict the Principle
of Contradiction. 109-10.
Causality, and Contradiction
and the factor of Time, 110-
13.
Realism, Critical (cont.)—
by Extension, 172.
Extension in terms of vision and
touch, 173.
impression of Extension a particu-
lar re-assertion of Principle
of Causality, 174.
Validity of Sensations established,
174.
applicability of Concepts to Real
World, 174-80.
knowledge of natures indirect
coming through their mani-
festations, 175.
errors in application, 176.
arising from faulty Concepts,
176-77.
arising from faulty application,
177-78-
remedy against errors, 178-80.
summary of findings on Validity
of Knowledge, 180-81.
Difficulties, Colour difficulty, 181-
83.
Discussion of Principle of
Causality not based on as-
sumption of existence of Real
World, 112-13.
Sceptic, Parthian shot, 113-14.
existence of Real World, 115-42.
Solipsism wrecked by Principle
of Causality, 117-20.
Conscious States and Principle
of Causality, 121-27.
can Conscious States elicit
each other, 122-24.
Sensation not stimulated by
other Conscious States,
124-25.
what is extra-mental reality?
125-42.
three possible forms, 127-28.
"A person " is not sole stimulus
of Conscious States, 128-33
Neither Spirit nor Force is
stimulus of Conscious States,
133-41.
existence of Real World must be
accepted, 142.
our means of knowing Nature of
Reality, 143-60.
Sense and Intellect—different in
kind, 145-66.
Sensation purports to give in-
formation concerning quali-
ties of external world, 164-66.
Intellect purports to give know-
ledge concerning Nature of
Things, 16466.
Validity of Knowledge, 167-92.
Limitations, 168.
Colour, what we mean by, 170-72.
this view of sensorial data only
a particular re-statement of
Principle of Causality, 172.
Shape difficulty, 183-87.
Illusion difficulty, 187-90.
Hallucination difficulty, 190-91.
summary of discussion on Validity
of Knowledge, 191-92.
natures and qualities of things
can be validly known but in-
directly, 192.
Nature and Scope of our Know-
ledge, 193-215-
Sense-bound, 194-97.
positive knowledge bound to
Matter, 195.
the immaterial conceivable, 195-
96.
can individual share thoughts and
experience of others? 197-204.
no direct communion between
minds, 198.
communication through senses,
198.
thoughts of others not repro-
duced but produced, 199.
experience not transmissible,
202.
individual and national history
confirms the non-transmissi-
bility of knowledge and ex-
perience, 203-4.
2


338
REALITY AND TRUTH
Realism, Critical: Certitude and
Truth: meaning of Truth
(cont.)~
Ontological and Logical, 223-
24-
Ontological—partial or com-
plete identity of object
with object, 225; definition,
226.
meaning of Logical Truth,
227-29.
rough classification of pro-
positions—Existential and
Qualitative, 227-28.
Logical Truth deals with
conformity of thought with
thought, 228; definition,
229.
general definition of Truth,
22g.
old formula, "conformity of
thought and thing," to be
avoided, 229-31.
Criterion of Truth, 231-41.
variety of criteria suggested by
philosophers, 231-32.
notes of a real criterion, 233-
35-
Realism, Critical Icont.)—
Law of Knowledge demands simi-
larity between knowing per-
son and known object, 204-5.
fact behind Law of Knowledge,
205-8.
Aristotelian theory on Manner
of Knowledge stated, 206.
our knowledge of inorganic
matter, 206.
our knowledge of living beings,
207-8.
our knowledge of ourselves,
208.
Knowledge involves a coincidence
of activities, 208-g.
Aristotle makes this coincidence
the manner of knowledge,
213-M.
not migration of forms, but coin-
cidence of activities, 214.
summary of Laws of Knowledge,
214-15.
Intellect seizes the relatively
constant natures of things,
215.
Sensation the inconstant activi-
ties, 215.
Certitude and Truth, 216-45.
statement of problem, 216-17.
nature of Certitude, 217-22.
definition of Certitude, 217.
distinction between Certitudes
and Certainty, 217.
Certitude one in kind, 217.
classification of Certitude, based
not on differences in state of
mind, but in subject-matter,
218-ig.
Moral Certitude — term criti-
cized, 21g.
Certitude admits of no degree,
210-20.
Certitudes divided according as
they rest on intrinsic or ex-
trinsic evidence, 220-22.
much of our "knowledge"
founded on Faith, 221-22.
no special criterion for Certi-
tudes, 222-23.
meaning of Truth, 223-31.
for objects and for proposi-
tions, 223-24.
extrinsic criteria of Truth im-
possible, 234.
the Will, not the Criterion, 236.
Kantian postulates inadmis-
sible, 236-37.
Authority and Tradition inad-
missible as criterion, 236-37.
common sense—a complex of
feeling and will and there-
fore inadmissible, 237.
satisfaction of whole man a
complex of feeling and will
and therefore inadmissible as
criterion, 237.
evidence of Cognitive pro-
cesses the real criterion,
237-40.
Cartesian criterion rejected,
239-
Secondary Criteria of Truth, 240-
41.
Humanist, Idealist, both use-
ful, 240-41.
evidence, the criterion of Certi-
tude, 241-42.


INDEX
339
Realism, Critical {cont.)—
part of the Will in making Certi-
tudes (attention and concen-
tration of the Intellect), 242-
44.
criterion same as that of Natural
Sciences, History, and Law,
244-45.
constructive work, an answer to
Kant, 277-79.
nothing " a priori " in conceptual
process, 279-81.
three intellectual processes:
Reason, Judgment, Concept,
280.
their dependence on experience,
281.
summary of, 283-85.
no chasm fixed between Reality
and its manifestations, 285.
we know natures by qualities, 285.
Noumena cannot be cut off from
phenomena, 285-86.
Aristotle opposed to Kant, 286.
Limitations of Causality reported,
288-89.
possibility of Science defended,
295-309.
it depends on validity of reason-
ing process, 297.
justification of Reasoning pro-
cess, 297-308.
Reasoning, Deductive and
Inductive, 298-99.
Deduction, 298-300.
Induction, 300-3.
Hume on Induction, 303-5.
Huxley on Induction, 303.
Kant on Induction, 304.
Truth of Induction, 305-8.
Canons of Induction obviate
mistakes, 308.
justification of Philosophy, 309-
19.
reason of neglect of Philo-
sophy, 309-11.
scope of Philosophy, 311-12.
methods of Philosophy in
dealings with:
Freedom of Will, 312-14.
Immortality of Soul, 314-
317.
existence of God, 317-18.
Realism, Critical: possibility of
Science defended: justification
of Philosophy (cont.)—
no synthetic principle for all
philosophy, 318.
Philosophy possible, 318-19.
Realism, Crude, i-ig.
origin, 2-5.
summary of, 5.
criticism of, 6-19.
Sceptical difficulties, 6-19.
inability to answer the ques-
tion, " What is the nature of
things ?" 6-g.
changes in Sensations of the
same person concerning the
same object, 6-g.
unable to answer questions as
to existence of External
World or Self, 14.
difficulties even when existence
of External World is con-
ceded, 15.
colour blindness, 15.
Criterion of Knowledge, 16.
correspondence of object and
concept as criterion of Truth,
r6-27.
Dogmatism real basis of, 64.
views on Truth, 230.
Reality, Nature of, 116.
Extra-mental, 127-42; existence
of, certain, 142.
our means of knowing, 143-66.
errors in application of concepts
to, 176-78.
from faulty concepts, r 76-77.
from faulty application, 177-78.
remedy against errors, 178-80.
application of concepts to, may be
valid, 180.
grasped mentally by reassertion of
Principle of Causality, 192.
Law of Knowledge demands some
similarity between knowing
person and known object,
204-5.
classification of, 206-8.
Bergson on, 209-11.
Democritus' system, 213.
Relative Constancy of nature of,
215; qualities inconstant,
214.


340
REALITY AND TRUTH
Reality, Nature of (cant.)—
Kantian system of, 249-64.
Hume's view on, 255.
Platonic tradition places gulf be-
tween Knowledge and, 278.
qualities connatural manifesta-
tions of natures, 284-S5.
enduring qualities same for same
nature, 306.
Real World. See Reality.
Reason, arguments in favour of
Scepticism based on conflict-
ing conclusions of, 27-35.
validity of, said to be assumed by
Critical Realism, and answer
to the charge, 98, 99.
justification of, 297-308.
of two kinds, Deductive and In-
ductive, 298.
Deduction justified, 298-300.
Induction justified, 300-8.
Practical. See Kant.
Pure. See Kant.
Satisfaction of whole man, as
criterion of Truth, 231; in-
admissible, 237.
Scepticism and Crude Realism, 3,
6-19.
an attitude of mind rather than a
system of thought, 23-25.
Scandal of Philosophy, and desire
for mental peace, factors in the
making of a Sceptic, 23-25.
arguments in favour of, 25-29.
scandal of Philosophy, 25-26.
Isostheneia, 27.
conflicting data of Knowledge, 27-
28.
inability of Knowledge to criticize
its own validity, 28-29.
criticism of its arguments, 29-36.
positive attack on, 37-46.
always has nucleus of posi-
tive assertion—inconsis-
tent, 37.
does not supply a guide for
practical life, 37-46.
Carneades' attempts to supply
this need from Probability,
39-
others appeal to Local Con-
ventions, 39.
Scepticism and Crude Realism:
positive attack on (cont.)—
criticism of this appeal to
Local Conventions, 40-43.
criticism of Carneades'
Theory, 43-46.
summary of, 45-46.
parallel between Dogmatism
and, 65.
attack on Principle of Identity,
go-g2.
Parthian shot at Critical Real-
ism, 113-14.
Kant and, 246; Hume and,
263.
Science: its views on Matter increase
difficulties of Crude Realism,
18.
Methodic Doubt of Descartes ap-
plied to, 69.
its criterion of Truth, that of
Critical Realism, 244.
depends upon the Reasoning pro-
cess, 297.
its possibility justified, 309.
attitude of, towards Philosophy,
310; explanation of this at-
titude, 309-11.
Methods and Principles and Facts
of, used by Philosophy, 318.
Sensations, solid and objective, to
Crude Realist, 2.
insufficiency of, to prove existence
of things or persons, 10-13.
of others, perhaps never known to
us, 16, 200-2.
conflicting data of, with reason,
an argument for the Sceptics,
27-28; refutation of argu-
ment, 32-35.
what stimulates ? 124-25.
not other conscious states,
124-25.
relation to Feelings of Passivity,
130-31.
different in kind from Intellect,
145-59.
Blurred-image Theory, 154-57.
depend on "consciousness of
meaning" for significance,
appeal to Subconscious Theory,
157-59-


INDEX
34i
Sensations (cont.)—
chief differences from Intellect,
160-66.
particularity of, 160; incommuni-
cability of, 164.
neither true nor false in them-
selves, 169.
their validity, 170-74.
Critical Realist's view of, 172.
variations of, as difficulty against
Validity of Knowledge, 181-
0I-
Theory of Knowledge (cont.)—
dilemma placed by Sceptics in
way of, 29.
dilemma placed in way of, by
Sceptics avoided, 35-36.
statement of Descartes' system,
68-74.
criticism of Descartes, 74-78.
why neglected for so long, 8S-89.
Bergson, 209-12.
Democritus, 213.
all the earlier work in, leads up
to and supports evidence as
criterion of Truth, 238-40.
of Kant:
exposed, 246-72.
criticized, 273-94.
For further details of Kant, see
Kant.
Independent of Science and at
the bases of all Knowledge,
3"-
starting-point of conscious oper-
ations, 194.
stimulated by Real World, 194.
of Immaterial, impossible, 195.
as means of communication be-
tween Intellects, 198.
not transmissible, 202.
in system of Democritus, 213.
grasps inconstant activities of
Reality, 214.
in system of Kant, 247-50.
Hume on, 255.
as valid representations of proper-
ties, 295-96.
Sense-Impressions, cannot validify
Induction, 304.
Sextus Empiricus: quoted on con-
flicting conclusions of
Reason, 28.
supports Local Conventions
Theory, 39.
Solipsism, 116-18; criticized, 120-27.
Space, as figured by-Crude Realists,
3-
cannot be used to define extension,
172.
description of, r73.
Kant and, 248-54.
Spirit, not sole Extra-mental Reality,
135-40.
Subconscious, appeal to, to explain
differences between Sensa-
tions and Concepts, 157-59.
Sufficient Reason, Principle of. See
Causality.
Thbory of Knowledge:
its object, 5.
various names of, 5.
method followed in this book, 5-6.
live questions of, 18.
Sec also Aristotle, Realism,
Hume, Descartes, Kant,
Democritus, Bergson.
Sec also Critical Realism.
Thomson, J. Arthur, quoted apro-
pos of Organic Matter, 207.
Thought. See Concept.
Thought-Process:
Introspection of, 148-54.
Consciousness of meaning, pre-
sent in, 148-53.
Introspection of, where there is a
Universal Term as stimulus,
148-50.
Introspection of, where stimulus
is a Particular Term, 150-53.
Introspection when nonsense-
words are stimulus, 153-54.
Time:
indication of the nature of our
concept, 284.
should it be a term in the Principle
of Contradiction, 110-12.
In Kantian system, see Kant.
Timon gives Local Conventions
Theory as Sceptical Guide in
Practical life, 39.
Titchener, "Experimental Psycho-
logy of, apropos of Ach's
Theory, the Thought Pro-
cess" of, quoted, 158.


342
REALITY AND TRUTH
Tradition cannot be criterion of
Truth, 232.
Transcendental, origin and mean-
ing, 86-89.
Properties, list of, 87-88.
Terms, list of, *>8.
Causality and Change not among
them, 105.
"Trans-subjective," criterion of
Truth must be, 234.
Trans-subjectivity, as note of a
criterion of Truth breaks
many systems, 235-37.
Truth:
criterion of Crude Realist, 3.
Correspondence, Theory of, 16-17.
Correspondence, Theory of,
criticized, 16-17.
unattainable if we accept Cor-
respondence Theory of, or
Crude Realist view, 17.
Cartesian question on existence of
primordial truth answered by
Balmes, 53-54.
Balmes, views on and divisions of,
53-
Real and Ideal, 53.
Three primitive truths of Palmieri,
57-58.
Cartesian, criterion of, 73-74.
meaning of, as a Transcendental
Term, 8788.
in Democritus' system, contrasted
with "use," 213.
and certitude, 216-45.
acquisition of, and alteration
in, Knowledge raise problems
of, 216-19.
statement of problems of, 216-
*7-
validity of certitudes depends
on, 222-23.
meaning of, 223-31.
division of, into Ontological
and Logical, 223-24.
discussion of Ontological Truth,
224-26.
Ontological Truth, partial or
complete identity of object
with object, 225.
Ontological, connects our past
and present experience, 225
26.
Truth: discussion of Ontological
Truth (cont.)—
Ontological Truth the truth of
things apprehended by a
mind, 226.
Definition of Ontological Truth,
226.
meaning of Logical, 227-29.
rough classification of Proposi-
tions, 227.
two kinds of propositions,
Existential and Qualitative,
227.
Logical Truth deals with con-
formity of thought with
thought, 228.
Logical Truth defended, 229.
general definition of, 229.
old formula, "conformity of
thought and thing," to be
avoided, 229-31.
Plain Realist's views on, 230.
variety of criteria of, suggested
by Philosophers, 231-32.
authority suggested as a cri-
terion of, 231.
"Consensus Generis Humani"
used by some as a criterion
of, 231.
inner illumination of mind sug-
gested by some as criterion
of, 231.
intuition suggested by some as
criterion of, 231.
operations of Will as criterion
of, 231.
acceptance of "reasonable"
postulates as criterion of,
231-
Immediacy of feeling suggested
by some as criterion of, 231.
common sense of the race used
by some as criterion of, 231.
satisfaction of the whole man
used by some as criterion of,
231-
"Correspondence" of Thought
and Object, Plain Realist's
criterion of, 232.
comprehensiveness used by
Idealists as criterion of, 232.
absence of Contradiction used
by some as criterion of, 232.


INDEX
343
Truth: variety of criteria of, sug-
gested by Philosophers (cont.)—
coherence used by Idealists as
criterion of, 232.
Adaptability and Utility, Prag-
matist criterion of, 232.
bases of various criteria of, 232.
notes of a real criterion of, 233-
35-
Immediacy an indispensable
note of a real criterion of,
233.
criterion must be intrinsic to
the knowing process, 233.
criterion must be "trans-sub-
jective," 234.
extrinsic criteria of, impossible,
234-
objective is not a good epithet
for a criterion of, 234-35.
strictly speaking there is no
"Objective Truth," 234-35.
not the privilege of a few,
235.
many criteria of Truth inadmis-
sible because not "trans-sub-
jective," 235-37.
feelings not the criterion of, as
they are subjective, 235-36.
Jacobi's criterion of, inadmis-
sible, 235-36.
the Will cannot be criterion of,
for both Desire and Delight
are personal and subjective,
236.
Kantian postulates of Practical
Reason cannot be criteria of,
236.
beliefs of all kinds resting on
the Will are inadmissible as
criteria of, 236-37.
authority of any kind cannot be
criterion of, 236-37.
tradition cannot be criterion of,
237.
no Complex of Feelings admis-
sible as criterion of, 237.
no Complex of Will admissible
as criterion of, 237.
Common Sense in part a Com-
plex of Feeling and Will and
therefore inadmissible as cri-
terion of, 237.
Truth: many criteria of Truth
inadmissible because not "trans-
subjective " (cont.)—
satisfaction of whole man is in
part a Complex of Feeling
and of Will and therefore
cannot be a criterion of, 237.
evidence of cognitive processes
the real criterion of, 237-40.
Cartesian criterion of, of no
avail, 239.
evidence has the three necessary
notes of criterion of, 239.
secondary criteria of, 240-41.
utility of secondary criteria of,
240-41.
Pragmatist criterion useful as
secondary criterion, 240-41.
Humanist criterion of, useful as
secondary criterion of, 240-41.
Idealist criterion of—coherence
and comprehensiveness—use-
ful as a secondary criterion,
241.
Evidence, test of, contrasted
with secondary criteria test
of probability, 241.
Criterion of, Evidence that of
the Natural Sciences, History
and Law, 244-45.
Evidence as criterion of, often
neglected by Philosophy and
other criteria used, 245.
Understanding asserted by Kant
to be the source of the Laws
of Nature, 249-50.
See also Intellect.
Universality:
of Knowledge. See Knowledge,
Intellect, Concept.
and Necessity, Kantian criterion
of Valid "a priori" Know-
ledge, 257.
Kantian Canon of "a priori"
knowledge, instance of use
of, 258.
of Laws of Nature, Hume denies
possibility of justifying, 256.
Utility:
Pragmatist criterion of Truth, 232.
useful as secondary criterion of
Truth, 240-41.


344
REALITY AND TRUTH
Vital Principle:
Human. See Human Soul.
Wallace:
his "Kant" quoted apropos of
the four types of judgment
in Kant's "a priori" cate-
gories, 251, 253.
his " Kant" quoted apropos of
Kantian Limitation of Valid
Knowledge, 262.
Will:
Operations of, suggested by some
as criteria of Truth, 231.
acceptance of reasonable pos-
tulates, 231.
to believe, 231.
two typical manifestations of,
Desire and Delight, 236.
Desire and Delight subjective and
personal, therefore cannot be
used as criterion of Truth,
236.
no complex of, admissible as
criterion of Truth, 237.
act of, always implied in belief,
237-
Common Sense in part a complex
of, and therefore inadmissible
as criterion of Truth, 237.
Will (cont.)—
satisfaction of whole man in part
a complex of and therefore in-
admissible as criterion of
Truth, 237.
rdle of, in making of certitudes,
242-44.
cannot make or unmake Truths
and therefore not convictions,
243-
the vitiating influence of De-
sires in search for Truth, 243.
in practice used in the making
of our certitudes but unjusti-
fiably so, 243.
Kant's use of the Practical
Reason may be reduced to
an effort of, 267.
Freedom of, for Kant a postulate
of the Practical Reason, 268.
an effort of, alone enables Kant
to accept the postulates of the
Practical Reason, 269-70.
Freedom of:
Kant's use of Categorical Im-
perative is an argument in
favour of, 291-92.
one of the consecrated problems
of Philosophy, 311-12.
method of Philosophy in deal-
ing with, 312-14.
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE UNIVERSITY FRBSS, ABBRDEEN





THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
GRADUATE LIBRARY

DATE DUE


UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
3 9015 02644 2460
f
^
uu
r
i-
i
i
i
i
u
s
ITT

DO NOT REMOVE
OR
MUTILATE CARD
m ™ I



■ ■ I
