
3 9015 00392 132 0
University of Michigan - BUHR



)














THE
PEOPLE'S
BOOKS
THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH





THE
PROBLEM OF TRUTH
By H. WILDON CARR
Honorary D.Litt., Durham

LONDON: T. C. & E. C. JACK
67 LONG ACRE, W.C., AND EDINBURGH
NEW YORK: DODGE PUBLISHING CO.





PREFACE
A problem of philosophy is completely different from a
problem of science. In science we accept our subject-
matter as it is presented in unanalysed experience; in
philosophy we examine the first principles and ultimate
questions that conoern conscious experience itself. The
problem of truth is a problem of philosophy. It is not
a problem of merely historical interest, but a present
problem—a living controversy, the issue of which is un-
decided. Its present interest may be said to centre
round the doctrine of pragmatism, which some fifteen
years ago began to challenge the generally accepted
principles of philosophy. In expounding this problem
of truth, my main purpose has been to make clear to
the reader the nature of a problem of philosophy and
to disclose the secret of its interest. My book presumes
no previous study of philosophy nor special knowledge
of its problems. The theories that I have shown in
conflict on this question are, each of them, held by
some of the leaders of philosophy. In presenting them,
therefore, I have tried to let the full dialectical force
of the argument appear. I have indicated my own
view, that the direction in which the solution lies is in
the new conception of life and the theory of knowledge
given to us in the philosophy of Bergson. If I am
right, the solution is not, like pragmatism, a doctrine of
the nature of truth, but a theory of knowledge in which
281522


vi PREFACE
the dilemma in regard to truth does not arise. But, as
always in philosophy, the solution of one problem is the
emergence of another. There is no finality.
My grateful acknowledgment is due to my friend
Professor S. Alexander, who kindly read my manuscript
and assisted me with most valuable suggestions, and
also to my friend Dr. T. Percy Nunn for a similar
service.
H. WILDON CARR.


CONTENTS
CHAP.
I. PHYSICS AND METAPHYSICS
II. APPEARANCE AND REALITY
HI. THE LOGICAL THEORIES
IV. THE ABSOLUTS
V. PRAGMATISM
VI. UTHJTY
VH. ILLUSION
Vm. THE PROBLEM OF ERROR
IX. CONCLUSION .
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX .
PAGE
9
15
20
28
42
55
67
74
88
91
94
vii


i


THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
CHAPTER I
PHYSICS AND METAPHYSICS
The progress of physical science leads to the continual
discovery of complexity in what is first apprehended as
simple. The atom of hydrogen, so long accepted as the
ideal limit of simplicity, is now suspected to be not the
lowest unit in the scale of elements, and it is no longer
conceived, as it used to be, as structureless, but as
an individual system, comparable to a solar system,
of electrical components preserving an equilibrium pro-
bably only temporary. The same tendency to dis-
cover complexity in what is first apprehended as simple
is evident in the study of philosophy. The more our
simple and ordinary notions are submitted to analysis,
the more are profound problems brought to conscious-
ness. It is impossible to think that we do not know
what such an ordinary, simple notion as that of truth
is; yet the attempt to give a definition of its meaning
brings quite unexpected difficulties to light, and the
widest divergence at the present time between rival
principles of philosophical interpretation is in regard to
a theory of the nature of truth. It is not a problem
that is pressed on us by any felt need, nor is anyone who
does not feel its interest called upon to occupy himself
with it. We speak our language before: we know.iis


10 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
grammar, and we reason just as well whether we have
learnt the science of logic or not.
This science of Logic, or, as it is sometimes called, of
Formal Logic, was, until modern times, regarded as a
quite simple account of the principles that govern the
exercise of our reasoning faculty, and of the rules
founded on those principles by following which truth
was attained and false opinion or error avoided. It was
called formal because it was supposed to have no re-
lation to the matter of the subject reasoned about, but
only to the form which the reasoning must take. A
complete account of this formal science, as it was recog-
nised and accepted for many ages, might easily have
been set forth within the limits of a small volume such
as this. But the development of modern philosophy
has wrought an extraordinary change. Anyone now
who will set himself the task of mastering all the pro-
blems that have been raised round the question of the
nature of logical process, will find himself confronted
with a vast library of special treatises, and involved in
discussions that embrace the whole of philosophy. The
special problem of truth tbat it is the object of this
little volume to explain is a quite modern question. It
has been raised within the present generation of philo-
sophical writers, and is to-day, perhaps, the chief
controversy in which philosophers are engaged. But
although it is only in the last few years that contro-
versy has been aroused on this question, the problem
is not new—it is indeed as old as philosophy itself. In
the fifth century before Christ, and in the generation
that immediately preceded Socrates, a famous philo-
sopher, Protagoras (481-411 B.C.) published a book
with the title The Truth. He had the misfortune,
common at that time, to offend the religious Athenians,


PHYSICS AND METAPHYSICS 11
for he spoke slightingly of the gods, proposing to
"banish their existence or non-existence from writing
and speech." He was convicted of atheism, and his
books were publicly burnt, and he himself, then seventy
years of age, was either banished or at least was obliged
to flee from Athens, and on his way to Sicily he lost
his life in a shipwreck. Our knowledge of this book of
Protagoras is due to the preservation of its argument
by Plato in the dialogue " Thesetetus." Protagoras, we
are there told, taught that "man is the measure of all
things—of the existence of things that are, and of the
non-existence of things that are not." "You have read
him ?" asks Socrates, addressing Thesetetus. "Oh yes,
again and again," is Thesetetus' reply. Plato was en-
tirely opposed to the doctrine that Protagoras taught.
It seemed to him to bring gods and men and tadpoles
to one level as far as truth was concerned; for he drew
the deduction that if man is the measure of all things,
then to each man his own opinion is right. Plato
opposed to it the theory that truth is the vision of a
pure objective reality.
This same problem that exercised the ancient world
is now again a chief centre of philosophical interest, and
the aim of this little book is not to decide that question,
but to serve as a guide and introduction to those who
desire to know what the question is that divides philo-
sophers to-day into the hostile camps of pragmatism
and intellectualism.
The subject is not likely to interest anyone who does
not care for the study of the exact definitions and ab-
stract principles that lie at the basis of science and
philosophy. There are many who are engaged in the
study of the physical and natural sciences, and also
many who devote themselves to the social and political


12 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
sciences, who hold in profound contempt the fine dis-
tinctions and intellectual subtleties that seem to them
the whole content of logic and metaphysic. The attitude
of the scientific mind is not difficult to understand. It
has recently been rather graphically expressed by a
distinguished and popular exponent of the principles
of natural science. "One may regard the utmost possi-
bilities of the results of human knowledge as the contents
of a bracket, and place outside the bracket the factor
x to represent those unknown and unknowable possi-
bilities which the imagination of man is never wearied
of suggesting. This factor x is the plaything of the
metaphysician."x This mathematical symbol of the
bracket, multiplied by a; to represent ^he unknown and
unknowable possibilities beyond it, will serve me to
indicate with some exactness the problem with which I
am going to deal. The symbol is an expression of the
agnostic position. The popular caricature of the meta-
physician and his "plaything" we may disregard as a
pure fiction. The unknowable x of the agnostic is not
the " meta" or " beyond" of physics which the meta-
physician vainly seeks to know. The only "beyond"
of physics is consciousness or experience itself, and this
is the subject-matter of metaphysics. Our present
problem is that of the bracket, not that of the factor
outside, if there is any such factor, nor yet the particular
nature of the contents within. There are, as we shall
see, three views that are possible of the nature of the
bracket. In one view, it is merely the conception of
the extent which knowledge has attained or can attain;
it has no intimate relation to the knowledge, but marks
externally its limit. This is the view of the realist. In
another view, the whole of knowledge is intimately related
1 Sir Ray Lackester.


PHYSICS AND METAPHYSICS 13
to its particular parts; the things we know are not a
mere collection or aggregate of independent facts that
we have discovered; the bracket which contains our
knowledge gives form to it, and relates organically the
dependent parts to the whole in one comprehensive s-
individual system. This is the view of the idealist.
There is yet another view: human knowledge is relative
to human activity and its needs; the bracket is the
ever-changing limit of that activity—within it is allv
that is relevant to human purpose and personality,
without it is all that is irrelevant. This is the view of
the pragmatist.
It is not only the scientific mind, but also the ethical
and religious mind, that is likely to be at least impatient,
if not contemptuous, of this inquiry. The question,
What is truth? will probably bring to everyone's mind
the words uttered by a Roman Procurator at the supreme
moment of a great world-tragedy. Pilate's question is
usually interpreted as the cynical jest of a judge indiffer-
ent to the significance of the great cause he was trying
—the expression of the belief that there is no revelation
of spiritual truth of the highest importance for our
human nature, or at least that there is no infallible test
by which it can be known. It is not this problem of
truth that we are now to discuss.
There are, on the other hand, many minds that can
never rest satisfied while they have accepted only, and
not examined, the assumptions of science and the values
of social and political and religious ideals. Their quest
of first principles may appear to more practical natures
a harmless amusement or a useless waste of intellectual
energy; but they are responding to a deep need of our
human nature, a need that, it may be, is in its very nature
insatiable—the need of intellectual satisfaction. It is


14 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
the nature of this intellectual satisfaction itself that is
our problem of truth.
There are therefore two attitudes towards the problem
of truth and reality—that of the mind which brings a
practical test to every question, and that of the mind
restless to gain by insight or by speculation a clue to the
mystery that enshrouds the meaning of existence. The
first attitude seems peculiarly to characterise the man
of science, who delights to think that the problem of
reality is simple and open to the meanest understanding.
Between the plain man's view and that of the man of
high attainment in scientific research there is for him
only a difference of degree, and science seems almost to
require an apology if it does not directly enlarge our
command over nature. It would explain life and con-
sciousness as the result of chemical combination of
material elements. Philosophy, on the other hand, is
the instinctive feeling that the secret of the universe is
not open and revealed to the plain man guided by
common-sense experience alone, even if to this experi-
ence be added the highest attainments of scientific
research. Either there is far more in matter than is
contained in the three-dimensional space it occupies,
or else the universe must owe its development to some-
thing beyond matter. The universe must seem a poor
thing indeed to a man who can think that physical
science does or can lay bare its meaning. It is the
intense desire to catch some glimpse of its meaning
that leads the philosopher to strive to transcend the
actual world by following the speculative bent of the
reasoning power that his intellectual nature makes
possible.


APPEARANCE AND REALITY 15
CHAPTER II
APPEARANCE AND REALITY
Our conscious life is one unceasing change. From the
first awakening of consciousness to the actual present,
no one moment has been the mere repetition of another,
and the moments which as we look back seem to have
made up our life are not separable elements of it but
our own divisions of a change that has been continuous.
And as it has been, so we know it will be until con-
sciousness ceases with death. Consciousness and life
are in this respect one and the same, although when we
speak of our consciousness we think chiefly of a passive
receptivity, and when we speak of our life we think of
an activity. Consciousness as the unity of knowing and
acting is a becoming. The past is not left behind, it
is with us in the form of memory; the future is not a
predetermined order which only a natural disability
prevents us from knowing, it is yet uncreated; con-
scious life is the enduring present which grows with the
past and makes the future.
This reality of consciousness is our continually chang-
ing experience. But there is also another reality with
which it seems to be in necessary relation and also in
complete contrast—this is the reality of the material or
physical universe. The world of physical reality seems
to be composed of a matter that cannot change in a
space that is absolutely unchangeable. This physical
world seems made up of solid things, formed out of
matter. Change in physical science is only a rearrange-
ment of matter or an alteration of position in space.
This physical reality is not, as psychical reality is,


16 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
known to us directly; it is an interpretation of our sense
experience. Immediate experience has objects, gene-
rally called sense data. These objects are what we
actually see in sensations of sight, what we actually
hear in sensations of sound, and so on; and they lead us
to suppose or infer physical objects—that is, objects that
do not depend upon our experience for their existence,
but whose existence is the cause of our having the ex-
perience. The process by which we infer the nature of
the external world from our felt experience is logical.
It includes perceiving, conceiving, thinking or reasoning.
The object of the logical process, the aim or ideal to
which it seeks to attain, is truth. Knowledge of reality
is truth.
There are therefore two realities, the reality of our
felt experience from which all thinking sets out, and
the reality which in thinking we seek to know. The
one reality is immediate; it is conscious experience
itself. The other reality is that which we infer from the
fact of experience, that by which we seek to explain our
existence. The one we feel, the other we think. If
the difference between immediate knowledge and mediate
knowledge or inference lay in the feeling of certainty
alone or in the nature of belief, the distinction would
not be the difficult one that it is. The theories of
idealism and realism show how widely philosophers are
divided on the subject. We are quite as certain of
some of the things that we can only infer as we are of
the things of which we are immediately aware. We
cannot doubt, for instance, that there are other persons
besides ourselves, yet we can have no distinct knowledge
of any consciousness but one—our own. Our knowledge
that there are other minds is an inference from our ob-
servation of the behaviour of some of the things we


APPEARANCE AND REALITY 17
directly experience, and from the experience of our own
consciousness. And even those things which seem in
direct relation to us—the things we see, or hear, or touch
—are immediately present in only a very small, perhaps
an infinitesimal, part of what we know and think of as
their full reality; all but this small part is inferred.
From a momentary sensation of sight, or sound, or touch
(we infer reality that far exceeds anything actually given
to us by the sensation.
Thinking is questioning experience. When our atten-
tion is suddenly attracted by something—a flash of light,
or a sound, or a twinge of pain—consciously or uncon-
sciously we say to ourself, What is that? The that—
a simple felt experience—contains a meaning, brings a
message, and we ask what? We distinguish the exist-
ence as an appearance, and we seek to know the reality.
The quest of the reality which is made known to us by
the appearance is the logical process of thought. The
end or purpose of this logical process is to replace the
immediate reality of the felt experience with a mediated
reality—that is, a reality made known to us. Directly,
therefore, that we begin to think, the immediately
present existence becomes an appearance, and through-
o*"* ae development of our thought it is taken to be
.libing that requires explanation. We seek to dis-
cover the reality which will explain it.
It is in this distinction of appearance and reality that
I the problem of truth arises. It does not depend upon
I any particular theory of knowledge. The same fact is
I recognised by idealists and by realists. Idealism may
jdeny that the knowledge of independent reality is pos-
Isible; realism may insist that it is implied in the very
J fact of consciousness itself—whichever is right, the
I reality which thinking brings before the mind is quite


18 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
unlike and of a different order to that which we imme-
diately experience in feeling. And even if we know
nothing of philosophy, if we are ignorant of all theories
of knowledge and think of the nature of knowledge
simply from the standpoint of the natural man, the fact
is essentially the same—the true reality of things is
something concealed from outward view, something to
he found out by science or by practical wisdom. Oui
knowledge of this reality may be true, in this case on/
is it knowledge; or it may be false, in which case it
not knowledge but opinion or error.
The reality then, the knowledge of which is truth, is
not the immediate reality of feeling but the inferred
reality of thought. To have any intelligible meaning,
the affirmation that knowledge is true supposes that
there already exists a distinction between knowledge
and the reality known, between the being and the
knowing of that which is known. In immediate know-
ledge, in actual conscious felt experience there is no
such distinction, and therefore to affirm truth or error
of such knowledge is unmeaning. I cannot have a
toothache without knowing that I have it. In the
actual felt toothache knowing and being are not only
inseparable—they are indistinguishable. If, however, I
think of my toothache as part of an independent ord'
of reality, my knowledge of it may be true or false.
am then thinking of it as the effect of an exposed ne;
or of an abscess or of an inflammation—as someth
that is to say, that is conditioned independently of
consciousness and that will cease to exist when
conditions are altered. In the same way, when I beh
a landscape, the blue expanse of sky and variegai
colour of the land which I actually experience are r
either true or false, they are immediate experience


APPEARANCE AND REALITY 19
which knowing is being and being is knowing. Truth
and error only apply to the interpretation of that
experience, to the independent reality that I infer from
it. We can, then, distinguish two kinds of knowledge
which we may call immediate and mediate, or, better
still, acquaintance and description. Accordingly, when
we say that something is, or when we say of anything
that it ie real, we may mean either of two things. We
may mean that it is part of the changing existence that
we actually feel and that we call consciousness or life,
or we may mean that it is part of an independent order
of things whose existence we think about in order to
explain, not what our feeling is (there can be no explana-
tion of this), but how it comes to exist. We know by
description a vast number of things with which we never
can be actually acquainted. Such, indeed, is the case
with all the knowledge by which we rule our lives and
conceive the reality which environs us. Yet we are
absolutely dependent on the reality we know by
acquaintance for all our knowledge of these things.
Not only is immediate sense experience and the know-
ledge it gives us by acquaintance the only evidence we
have of the greater and wider reality, but we are de-
pendent on it for the terms wherewith to describe it,
for the form in which to present it, for the matter with
which to compose it. And this is the real ground of
the study of philosophy, the justification of its stand-
point. It is this fact—this ultimate undeniable fact—
that all reality of whatever kind and in whatever way
known, TVhether by thought or by feeling, whether it is
perceived or conceived, remembered or imagined, is in
the end composed of sense^exgerience: it is this fact
from which all the problems of philosophy arise. It is
this fact that our utilitarian men of science find them-


20 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
selves forced to recognise, however scornful they may
be of metaphysical methods and results.
The special problem of the nature of truth is con-
cerned, then, with the reality that we have distinguished
as known by description, and conceived by us as inde-
pendent in its existence of the consciousness by which
we know it. What is the nature of the seal by which
we stamp this knowledge true?
CHAPTEE ni
THE LOGICAL THEORIES
Whoever cares to become acquainted with the diffi-
culty of the problem of truth must not be impatient of
dialectical subtleties. There is a well-known story in
Boswell's Life of Dr. Johnson which relates how the
Doctor refuted Berkeley's philosophy which affirmed the
non-existence of matter. "I observed," says Boswell,
"that though we are satisfied his doctrine is not true,
it is impossible to refute it. I shall never forget the
alacrity with which Johnson answered, striking his foot
with mighty force against a large stone, till he rebounded
from it—' I refute it thus?" Dr. Johnson is the repre-
sentative of robust common sense. It has very often
turned out in metaphysical disputes that the common-
sense answer is the one that has been justified in the
end. Those who are impatient of metaphysics are,
therefore, not without reasonable ground; and indeed
the strong belief that the common-sense view will be
justified in the end, however powerful the sceptical
doubt that seems to contradict it, however startling
the paradox that seems to be involved in it, is a posses-
sion of the human mind without which the ordinary


THE LOGICAL THEORIES 21
practical conduct of life would be impossible. When,
then, we ask ourselves, What is truth? the answer seems
to be simple and obvious. Truth, we reply, is a pro-^
perty of certain of our ideas; it means their agreement, ^
as falsity means their disagreement, with reality. If I
say of anything that it is so, then, if it is so, what I say
is true; if it is not so, then what I say is false. This
simple definition of truth is one that is universally
accepted. No one really can deny it, for if he did he
would have nothing to appeal to to justify his own
theory or condemn another. / The problem of truth is
only raised when we ask, What does the agreement of *
an idea with reality mean? If the reader will ask
himself that question, and carefully ponder it, he will
see that there is some difficulty in the answer to the
simple question, What is truth? |The answer that will
probably first of all suggest itself is that the idea is a ''
copy of the reality. And at once many experiences
will seem to confirm this view. Thus when we look at a
landscape we know that the lines of light which radiate
from every point of it pass through the lens of each of
our eyes to be focussed on the retina, forming there a
small picture which is the exact counterpart of the
reality. If we look into another person's eye we may
see there a picture of the whole field of his vision re-
flected from his lens. It is true that what we see is
not what he sees, for that is on his retina, but the analogy
of this with a photographic camera, where we see the
picture on the ground glass, seems obvious and natural;
and so we think of knowledge, so far as it depends on
the sense of vision, as consisting in more or less vivid,
more or less faded, copies of real things stored up by'
the memory. But a very little reflection will convince
us that the truth of our ideas cannot consist in the fact


22 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
that they are copies of realities, for clearly they are not
copies in any possible meaning of the term. Take, for
example, this very illustration of seeing a landscape:
what we see is not a picture or copy of the landscape,
but the real landscape itself. We feel quite sure of
this, and with regard to the other sensations, those
that come to us by hearing, taste, smell, touch, it would
seem highly absurd to suppose that the ideas these
sensations produce in us are copies of real things. The
pain of burning is not a copy of real fire, and the truth
of the judgment, Fire burns, does not consist in the fact
that the ideas denoted by the words "fire," "burns,"
faithfully copy certain real things which are not ideas.
/ And the whole notion is seen to be absurd if we consider
that, were it a fact that real things produce copies of
themselves in our mind, we could never know it was so—
all that we should have any knowledge of would be the
copies, and whether these were like or unlike the reality,
or indeed whether there was any reality for them to be
like would, in the nature of the case, be unknowable,
and we could never ask the question.
If, then, our ideas are not copies of things, and if
there are things as well as ideas about things, it is quite
clear that the ideas must correspond to the things in
some way that does not make them copies of the things.
The most familiar instance of correspondence is the
symbolism we use in mathematics. Are our ideas of
this nature? And is their truth their correspondence?
} Is a perfectly true idea one in which there exists a point
to point correspondence to the reality it represents?
At once there will occur to the mind a great number of
instances where this seems to be the case. A map of
England is not a copy of England such as, for example,
a photograph might be if we were to imagine it taken


THE LOGICAL THEORIES 23
from the moon.. The correctness or the truth of a map i
consists in the correspondence between the reality and J n/
the diagram, which is an arbitrary sign of it. Through-'
out the whole of our ordinary life we find that we make
use of symbols and signs that are not themselves either
parts of or copies of the things for which they stand.
Language itself is of this nature, and there may be L^»
symbols of symbols of symbols of real things. Written; ,*'*
language is the arbitrary visual sign of spoken language^ ',
and spoken language is the arbitrary sign, it may be, of
an experienced thing or of an abstract idea. Is, then,1)—
this property of our ideas which we call truth they *
correspondence of ideas with their objects, and is falsity |
the absence of this correspondence? It cannot be so.V A \
To imagine that ideas can correspond with realities is > y
to forget that ideas simply are the knowledge of realities; \ /
it is to slip into the notion that we know two kinds of . (.
different things, first realities and secondly ideas, and M
r -
,I
that we can compare together these two sorts of things.
But it is at once evident that if we could know realities
without ideas, we should never need to have recourse^1
to ideas. It is simply ridiculous to suppose that the '^:
relation between consciousness and reality which we
call knowing is the discovery of a correspondence be-
tween mental ideas and real things. (The two things
that are related together in knowledge are npt the idea
and its object, but the mind and its object.) The idea
of the object is the knowledge of the object. There
may be correspondence between ideas, but not between
ideas and independent things, for that supposes that the
mind knows the ideas and also knows the things and
observes the correspondence between them. And even
if we suppose that ideas are an independent kind of
entity distinguishable and separable from another kind


24 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
of entity that forms the real world, how could we know
that the two corresponded, for the one would only be
inferred from the other?
,1 There is, however, a form of the correspondence
,." theory of truth that is presented in a way which avoids
this difficulty. Tm thj-JLifLg—lL. 1? concerned not with \
the nature of things themselves but with our judgments
aboHt^'themT' -JudgmenTT is not concerned with the I
terms Tihat enter into relation—these are immediately
experienced and ultimate—but with the relations in j
which they stand to one another. Thus, when we say'
John is the father of James, the truth of our judgment
does not consist in the adequacy of our ideas of John
and James, nor in the correspondence of our ideas with
the realities, but is concerned only with the relation
that is affirmed to exist between them. This relation
is declared to be independent of or at least external to
the terms, and, so far as it is expressed in a judgment,
,, yy truth consists in its actual correspondence with fact.
So if I say John is the father of James, then, if John is
the father of James, the judgment is true, the affirma-
tion is a truth; if he is not, it is false, the affirmation
is a falsehood. This view has the merit of simplicity, and
is sufficiently obvious almost to disarm criticism. There
is, indeed, little difficulty in accepting it if we are able
to take the view of the nature of the real universe
which it assumes. The theory is best described as
v. pluralistic realism. It is the view that the universe
consists of or is composed of an aggregate of an infinite
number of entities. Some of these have a place in the
space and time series, and these exist. Some, on the
other hand, are possibilities which have not and may
never have any actual existence. Entities that have
their place in the perceptual order of experience exist,


THE LOGICAL THEORIES 25
or have existed, or will exist; but entities that are
concepts, such as goodness, beauty, truth, or that are
abstract symbols like numbers, geometrical figures, pure
forms, do not exist, but are none the less just as real
as the entities that do exist. These entities are the
subject-matter of our judgments, and knowing is dis-^
covering the relations in which they stand to one \
another. The whole significance of this view lies in N
the doctrine that relations are external to the entities /
that are related—they do not enter into and form partN .
of the nature of the entities. The difficulty of this/
view is just this externality of the relation. It seems
difficult to conceive what nature is left in any entity
deprived of all its relations. The relation of father and
son in the judgment, John is the father of James, is so
far part of the nature of the persons John and James,
that if the judgment is false then to that extent John
and James are not the actual persons John and James
that they are thought to be. And this is the case even
in so purely external a relation as is expressed, say, in
the judgment, Edinburgh is East of Glasgow. It is
difficult to discuss any relation which can be said to be
entirely indifferent to the nature of its terms, and it is
doubtful if anything whatever would be left of a term
abstracted from all its relations.
^ These difficulties have led to the formulation of an
altogether different theory, namely, the theory that
truth does not consist in correspondence between ideas
and their real counterparts, but in the consistence and
internal harmony of the ideas themselves. It is named
the coherence theory. It will be recognised at once
that there is very much in common experience to
support it. It is by the test of consistency and
coherence that we invariably judge the truth of evidence.


26 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
y
Also it seems a very essential part of our intellectual
nature to reject as untrue and false any statement or
any idea that is self-contradictory of irreconcilable with
the world of living experience. But then, on the other
hand, we by no means allow that that must be true
which does not exhibit logical contradiction and incon-
sistency. It is a common enough experience that ideas
prove false though they have exhibited no inherent
failure to harmonise with surrounding circumstances
nor any self-contradiction. The theory, therefore, re-
quires more than a cursory examination.
Thinking is the activity of our mind which discovers
the order, arrangement, and system in the reality that
the senses reveal. Without thought, our felt experience
would be a chaos and not a world. The philosopher
Kant expressed this by saying that the understanding
gives unity to the manifold of sense. The understanding,
he said, makes nature. It does this by giving form to
the matter which comes to it by the senses. The mind
is not a tabula rasa upon which the external world makes
and leaves impressions, it is a relating activity which
arranges the matter it receives in forms. First of all
there are space and time, which are forms in which we
receive all perceptual experience, and then there are
categories that are conceptual frames or moulds by
which we think of everything we experience as having
definite relations and belonging to a real order of ex-
istence. Substance, causality, quality, and quantity
are categories; they are universal forms in which the
mind arranges sense experience, and which constitute
the laws of nature, the order of the world. Space and
time, and the categories of the understanding Kant
declared to be transcendental—that is to say, they are
the elements necessary to experience which are not


THE LOGICAL THEORIES 27
themselves derived from experience, as, for example,
that every event has a cause. There are, he declared,
synthetic a priori judgments—that is, judgments about
experience which are not themselves derived from ex-
perience, but, on the contrary, the conditions that
make experience possible. It is from this doctrine of
Kant that the whole of modern idealism takes its rise.
Kant, indeed, held that there are things-in-themselves,
and to this extent he was not himself an idealist, but
he also held that things-in-themselves are unknowable,
and this is essentially the idealist position. Clearly,
if we hold the view that things-in-themselves are un-
knowable, truth cannot be a correspondence between
our ideas and these things-in-themselves. Truth must
be some quality of the ideas themselves, and this can
only be their logical consistency. Consistency, be-
cause the ideas must be in agreement with one another;
and logical, because this consistency belongs to the
thinking, and logic is the science of thinking. Truth,
in effect, is the ideal of logical consistency. We experi-
ence in thinking an activity striving to attain the
knowledge of reality, and the belief, the feeling of satis-
faction that we experience when our thinking seems to
attain the knowledge of reality, is the harmony, the
absence of contradiction, the coherence, of our ideas
themselves. This is the coherence theory. Let us see
what it implies as to the ultimate nature of truth and
reality. ^
In both the theories we have now examined, truth is
a logical character of ideas. In the. correspondence
theory there is indeed supposed a non-logical reality,
but it is only in the ideas that there is the conformity
or correspondence which constitutes their truth. In
the coherence theory, reality is itself ideal, and the


28 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
ultimate ground of everything is logical. This is the
theory of truth that accords with the idealist view, and
this view finds its most perfect expression in the theory
of the Absolute. The Absolute is the idea of an object
that realises perfect logical consistency. This object
logic itself creates; if it be a necessary existence, then
knowledge of it cannot be other than truth. This view,
on account of the supreme position that it assigns to
the intellect, and of the fundamental character with
which it invests the logical categories, has been named
by those who oppose it Intellectualism. It is important
that it should be clearly understood, and the next chapter
will be devoted to its exposition.
CHAPTER IV
THE ABSOLUTE
A comparison of the two theories of truth examined
in the last chapter will show that, whereas both rest on
a logical quality in ideas, the first depends on an ex-
ternal view taken by the mind of an independent non-
mental reality, whereas the second depends on the
discovery of an inner meaning in experience itself. It
is this inner meaning of experience that we seek to know
when asking any question concerning reality. It is
the development of this view, and what it implies as to
the ultimate nature of reality and truth, that we are now
to examine.
When we ask questions about reality, we assume in
the very inquiry that reality is of a nature that experi-
ence reveals. Reality in its ultimate nature may be
logical—that is to say, of the nature of reason, or it may


THE ABSOLUTE 29
be non-logical—that is to say, of the nature of feeling or
will; but in either case it must be a nature of which
conscious experience can give us knowledge. If indeed
we hold the view which philosophers have often en-
deavoured to formulate, that reality is unknowable,
then there is no more to be said; for, whatever the picture
or the blank for a picture by which the mind tries to
present this unknowable reality, there can be no question
in relation to it of the nature and meaning of truth.
An unknowable reality, as we shall show later on, is
to all intents and purposes non-existent reality. On
the other hand, if thinking leads to the knowledge of
reality that we call truth, it is because being and know-
ing are ultimately one, and this unity can only be in
conscious experience. This is the axiom on which the
idealist argument is based.
The theory of the Absolute is a logical argument of
great dialectical force. It is not an exaggeration to
say that it is the greatest dialectical triumph of modern
philosophy. It is the most successful expression of
idealism. That this is not an extravagant estimate
is shown, I think, by the fact that, widespread and
determined as is the opposition it has had to encounter,
criticism has been directed not so much against its logic
as against the basis of intellectualism on which it rests.
The very boldness of its claim and brilliance of its
triumph lead to the suspicion that the intellect cannot
be the sole determining factor of the ultimate nature
of reality.
It will be easier to understand the theory of the
Absolute if we first of all notice, for the sake of after-
wards comparing it, another argument very famous in
the history of philosophy—the argument to prove the
existence of God named after St. Anselm of Canterbury.


80 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
It runs thus: We have in God the idea of a perfect being;
the idea of a perfect being includes the existence of that
being, for not to exist is to fall short of perfection; there-
fore God exists. The theological form of this argument
need raise no prejudice against it. It is of very great
intrinsic importance, and if it is wrong it is not easy to
point out wherein the fallacy lies. It may, of course,
be denied that we have or can have the idea of a perfect
being—that is to say, that we can present that idea to
the mind with a positive content or meaning as distinct
from a merely negative or limiting idea. But this is
practically to admit the driving force of the argument,
namely, that there may be an idea of whose content or
meaning existence forms part. With regard to every-
thing else the idea of existing is not existence. There
is absolutely no difference between the idea of a hundred
dollars and the idea of a hundred dollars existing, but
there is the whole difference between thought and reality
in the idea of the hundred dollars existing and the ex-
istence of the hundred dollars. Their actual existence
in no way depends on the perfection or imperfection of
my idea, nor in the inclusion of their existence in my
idea. This is sufficiently obvious in every case in which
we are dealing with perceptual reality, and in which
we can, in the words of the philosopher Hume, produce
the impression which gives rise to the idea. But there
are some objects which by their very nature will not
submit to this test. No man hath seen God at any
time, not because God is an object existing under con-
ditions and circumstances of place and time impossible
for us to realise by reason of the limitations of our finite
existence, but because God is an object in a different
sense from that which has a place in the perceptual
order, and therefore it is affirmed of God that the


THE ABSOLUTE 31
idea involves existence. God is not an object of per-
ception, either actual or possible; nor in the strict sense
is God a concept—that is to say, a universal of which
there may be particulars. He is in a special sense the
object of reason. If we believe that there is a God, it
is because our reason tells us that there must be. God,
in philosophy, is the idea of necessary existence, and
the argument runs: God must be, therefore is. If, then,
we exclude from the idea of God every mythological
and theological element—if we mean not Zeus nor
Jehovah nor Brahma, but the first principle of existence
—then we may find in the St. Anselm argument the
very ground of theism.
I have explained this argument, which is of the class
called ontological because it is concerned with the
fundamental question of being, in order to give an in-
stance of the kind of argument that has given us the
theory of the Absolute. I will now try to set that
theory before the reader, asking only that he will put
himself into the position of a plain man with no special
acquaintance with philosophy, but reflective and anxious
to interpret the meaning of his ordinary experience.
We have already seen that thinking is the questioning
of experience, and that the moment it begins it gives
rise to a distinction between appearance and reality.
It is the asking what? of every that of felt experience
to which the mind attends. The world in which we
find ourselves is extended all around us in space and
. full of things which affect us in various ways: some
give us pleasure, others give us pain, and we ourselves
are things that affect other things as well as being our-
selves affected by them. When we think about the things
in the world in order to discover what they really are,
we very soon find that we are liable to illusion and error.


32 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
Things turn out on examination to be very different to
what we first imagined them to be. Our ideas, by which
we try to understand the reality of things are just so
many attempts to correct and set right our illusions
and errors. And so the question arises, how far are our
ideas about things truths about reality? It is very
soon evident that there are some qualities of things that
give rise to illusion and error much more readily than
others. The spatial qualities of things, solidity, shape,
size, seem to be real in a way that does not admit of
doubt. We seem able to apply to these qualities a test
that is definite and absolute. On the other hand, there
seem to be effects of these things in us such as their
colour, taste, odour, sound, coldness, or heat, qualities
that are incessantly changing and a fruitful source of
illusion and error. We therefore distinguish the spatial
qualities as primary, and consider that they are the real
things and different from their effects, which we call
their secondary qualities. And this is, perhaps, our
most ordinary test of reality. If, for example, we
should think that something we see is an unreal phantom,
or a ghost, or some kind of hallucination, and on going
up to it find that it does actually occupy space, we
correct our opinion and say the thing is real. But the
spatial or primary qualities of a thing, although they
may seem more permanent and more essential to the
reahty of the thing than the secondary qualities, are
nevertheless only qualities. They are not the thing
itself, but ways in which it affects us. It seems to us
that these qualities must inhere in or belong to the
thing, and so we try to form the idea of the real thing
as a substance or substratum which has the qualities.
This was a generally accepted notion until Berkeley
(1685-1753) showed how contradictory it is. So


THE ABSOLUTE 38
simple and convincing was his criticism of the notion,
that never since has material substance been put for-
ward as an explanation of the reality of the things we
perceive. All that he did was to show how impossible
and contradictory it is to think that the reality of that
which we perceive is something in its nature impercep-
tible, for such must material substance be apart from its
sense qualities. How can that which we perceive be
something imperceptible? And if we reflect on it, we
shall surely agree that it is so—by the thing we mean its
qualities, and apart from the qualities there is no thing.
We must try, then, in some other way to reach the reality.
What, we shall now ask, can it be that binds together
these sense qualities so that we speak of them as a
thing? There are two elements that seem to enter
into everything whatever that comes into our experience,
and which it seems to us would remain if everything
in the universe were annihilated. These are space and
time. Are they reality? Here we are met with a new
kind of difficulty. It was possible to dismiss material
substance as a false idea, an idea of something whose
existence is impossible; but space and time are certainly
not false ideas. The difficulty about them is that we
cannot make our thought of them consistent—they are
ideas that contain a self-contradiction, or at least that
lead to a self-contradiction when we affirm them of
reality. With the ideas of space and time are closely
linked the ideas of change, of movement, of causation,
of quality and quantity, and all of these exhibit this
same puzzling characteristic, that they seem to make
us affirm what we deny and deny what we affirm. I
might fill this little book with illustrations of the para-
doxes that are involved in these ordinary working ideas.
Everyone is familiar with the difficulty involved in the
O


34 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
idea of time. We must think there was a beginning,
and we cannot think that there was any moment to
which there was no before. So also with space, it is
an infinite extension which we can only think of as a
beyond to every limit. This receding limit of the
infinitely extensible space involves the character of in-
finite divisibility, for if there are an infinite number of
points from which straight lines can be drawn without
intersecting one another to any fixed point there is
therefore no smallest space that cannot be further
divided. The contradictions that follow from these
demonstrable contents of the idea of space are endless.
The relation of time to space is another source of con-
tradictory ideas. I shall perhaps, however, best make
the meaning of this self-contradictory character of our
ordinary ideas clear by following out a definite illustra-
tion. What is known as the antinomy of motion is
probably familiar to everyone from the well-known
paradox of the Greek philosopher Zeno. The flying
arrow, he said, does not move, because if it did it would
be in two places at one and the same time, and that is
impossible. I will now put this same paradox of move-
ment in a form which, so far as I know, it has not been
presented before. My illustration will involve the idea
of causation as well as that of movement. If we sup-
pose a space to be fully occupied, we shall agree that
nothing within that space can move without thereby
displacing whatever occupies the position into which
it moves. That is to say, the movement of any occupant
of one position must cause the displacement of the
ocoupant of the new position into which he moves.
But on the other hand it is equally clear that the dis-
placement of the occupant of the new position is a
prior condition of the possibility of the movement of


THE ABSOLUTE 85
the mover, for nothing can move unless there is an un-
occupied place for it to move into, and there is no un-
occupied place unless it has been vacated by its occupant
before the movement begins. We have therefore the
clear contradiction that a thing can only move when
something else which it causes to move has already
moved. Now if we reflect on it we shall see that this
is exactly the position we occupy in our three-dimen-
sional space. The space which surrounds us is occupied,
and therefore we cannot move until a way is made clear
for us, and nothing makes way for us unless we move.
We cannot move through stone walls because we cannot
displace solid matter, but we can move through air and
water because we are able to displace these. The
problem is the same. My movement displaces the air,
but there is no movement until the air is displaced.
Can we escape the contradiction by supposing the dis-
placement is the cause and the movement the effect.
Are we, like people in a theatre queue, only able to move
from behind forward as the place is vacated for us in
front? In that case we should be driven to the in-
credible supposition that the original cause or con-
dition of our movement is the previous movement of
something at the outskirts of our occupied space, that
this somewhat moving into the void made possible the
movement of the occupant of the space next adjoining,
and so on until after a lapse of time which may be ages,
which may indeed be infinite, the possibility of move-
ment is opened to us. In fact we must believe that the
effect of our movement—namely, the displacement of
the previous occupants from the positions we occupy
in moving—happened before it was caused. Now it is
impossible for us to believe either of the only two
alternatives—either that we do not really move but only


86 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
appear to do so, or that the displacement our movement
causes really precedes the movement. When we meet
with a direct self-contradiction in our thoughts about
anything, we can only suppose that that about which
we are thinking is in its nature nonsensical, or else that
our ideas about it are wrong.
It may perhaps be thought that the whole difficulty
arises simply because what we are trying to think con-
sistently about is a reality that is external to us. Space
and time, movement, cause and effect are ideas that
apply to a world outside and independent of the mind
that tries to think it. May not this be the reason of
our failure and the whole explanation of the seeming
contradiction? If we turn our thoughts inward upon
our own being and think of the self, the I, the real
subject of experience, then surely where thought is at
home and its object is mental not physical, we shall
know reality. It is not so. The same self-contra-
diction characterises our ideas when we try to present
the real object of inner perception as when we try to
present the real object of external perception. Not, of
course, that it is possible to doubt the reality of our own
existence, but that we fail altogether to express the
meaning of the self we so surely know to exist in any
idea which does not fall into self-contradiction. As in
the case of the thing and its qualities, we think that
there is something distinct from the qualities in which
they inhere and yet find ourselves unable to present to
the mind any consistent idea of such thing, so we think
that there must be some substance or basis of personal
identity, some real self which has the successive changing
conscious states, which has the character which dis-
tinguishes our actions as personal but which neverthe-
less »* not itself these things. The self-contradiction


THE ABSOLUTE 87
in the idea of self, or I, or subject, is that it both cannot
change and is always changing. As unchanging, we
distinguish it from our body, which is an external object
among other objects and is different from other objects
only in the more direct and intimate relation in which
it stands to us. The body is always changing; never
for two successive moments is it exactly the same
combination of chemical elements. We distinguish also
ourself from that consciousness which is memory, the
awareness of past experience, from present feelings,
desires, thoughts, and strivings—these, we say, belong
to the self but are not it. The self must have qualities
and dwell in the body, guiding, directing, and controlling
it, yet this self we never perceive, nor can we conceive
it, for our idea of it is of a reality that changes and is
yet unchangeable.
There is, however, one idea—an idea to which we
have already alluded—that seems to offer us an escape
from the whole of this logical difficulty, the idea that
reality is unknowable. May not the contradictoriness
of our ideas be due to this fact, that our knowledge is
entirely of phenomena, of appearances of things, and
not of things as they are in themselves? By a thing-
in-itself we do not mean a reality that dwells apart in
a universe of its own, out of any relation whatever to
our universe. There may or may not be such realities,
and whether there are or not is purely irrelevant to
any question of the nature of reality in our universe.
The thing-in-itself is the unknowable reality of the
thing we know. We conceive it as existing in complete
abstraction from every aspect or relation of it that
constitutes knowledge of it in another. The self-con-
tradiction of such an idea is not difficult to show, quite
apart from any consideration of its utter futility as an


38 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
explanation. The thing-in-itself either is or else it is
not the reality of phenomena. If it is, then, inasmuch
as the phenomena reveal it, it is neither in-itself nor
unknowable. If, on the other hand, it is not, if it is
unrelated in any way to phenomena, then it is not only
unknowable—it does not exist to be known. It is an
idea without any content or meaning, and therefore in-
distinguishable from nothing. It is simply saying of
one and the same thing that it must be and that there
is nothing that it can be.
While, then, there is no actual thing that we experi-
ence, whether it be an object outside of us or an object
within us, of which we can say this is not a pheno-
menon or appearance of reality but the actual reality
itself, we cannot also say that we do not know reality,
because if we had no idea, no criterion, of reality we
could never know that anything was only an appearance.
It is this fact—the fact that we undoubtedly possess, in
the very process of thinking itself, a criterion of reality—
that the idealist argument lays hold of as the basis of
its doctrine. The mere fact seems, at first sight, barren
and unpromising enough, but the idealist does not find
S it so. Possessed of this principle, logic, which has
seemed till now purely destructive, becomes in his
hands creative, and gives form and meaning to an
object of pure reason.
The criterion of reality is self-consistency. We cannot
think that anything is ultimately real which has its
ground of existence in something else. A real thing is
that which can be explained without reference to some
other thing. Reality, therefore, is completely self-
contained existence, not merely dependent existence.
Contradictions cannot be true. If we have to affirm, a
contradiction of anything, it must be due to an appear-


THE ABSOLUTE 39
ance, and the reality must reconcile the contradiction.
The idea of reality, therefore, is the idea of perfect
harmony. Knowing, then, what reality is, can we say
that there is any actual object of thought that conforms
to it? And have we in our limited experience anything
that will guide us to the attainment of this object?
The idealist is confident that we have. Some things
seem to us to possess a far higher degree of reality than
others, just because they conform in a greater degree
to this ideal of harmonious existence. It is when we
compare the reality of physical things with the reality
of mental things that the contrast is most striking, and
in it we have the clue to the nature of the higher reality.
'Physical reality may seem, and indeed in a certain
sense is, the basis of existence, but when we try to
think out the meaning of physical reality, it beoomes
increasingly abstract, and we seem unable to set any
actual limit to prevent it dissipating into nothing. In
physical science we never have before us an actual
element, either matter or energy, in which we can
recognise, however far below the limit of perceivability,
the ultimate stuff of which the universe is composed.
Science has simply to arrest the dissipation by boldly
assuming a matter that is the substance and foundation
of reality and an energy that is the ultimate cause of
the evolution of the universe. On the other hand, when
we consider mental existence, the pursuit of reality is
in an exactly contrary direction. There, the more con-
crete, the more comprehensive, the more individual a
thing is, the greater degree of reality it seems to have.
In the spiritual realm, by which we mean, not some
supposed supra-mundane sphere, but the world of
values, the world in which ideas have reality, in which
we live our rational life, reality is always sought in a


40 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
higher and higher individuality. The principle of indi-
viduality is that the whole is more real than the parts.
An individual human being, for example, is a whole,
an indivisible organic unity, not merely an aggregation
of physiological organs with special functions, nor are
these a mere collection of special cells, nor these a mere
concourse of chemical elements. The State as a com-
munity is an individual organic unity with a reality
that is more than the mere total of the reality of indi-
vidual citizens who compose it. It is this principle of
individuality that is the true criterion of reality. It is
this principle that, while it leads us to seek the unity
in an individuality ever higher and more complete than
we have attained, at the same time explains the dis-
crepancy of our partial view, explains contradictions as
the necessary result of the effort to understand the
parts in independence of the whole which gives to
them their reality. Thus, while on the. one hand the
scientific search for reality is ever towards greater
simplicity and abstractness, a simplicity whose ideal
limit is zero, the philosophical search for reality is ever
towards greater concreteness, towards full comprehen-
siveness, and its ideal hmit is the whole universe as
one perfect and completely harmonious individual.
This idea of full reality is the Absolute. There are not
two realities, one material and the other spiritual; the
material and the spiritual are two directions in which
we may seek the one reality, but there is only one
pathway by which we shall find it.
The Absolute is the whole universe not in its aspect
of an aggregate of infinitely diverse separate elements,
whether these are material or spiritual, but in its aspect
of an individual whole and in its nature as a whole.
This nature of the whole is to be individual—only in


THE ABSOLUTE 41
the individual are contradictions reconciled. Is the
Absolute more than an idea? Does it actually exist?
Clearly we cannot claim to know it by direct experience,
by acquaintance; it is not a that of which we can ask
what? It is the object of reason itself, therefore we
know that it must be. Also we know that it can be; it
is a possible object in the logical meaning that it is not
a self-contradictory idea, like every other idea that we
can have. It is not self-contradictory, for it is itself
the idea of that which is consistent. Therefore, argues
the idealist, it is, for that which must be, and can be,
surely exists. The reader will now understand why I
introduced this account of the Absolute with a descrip-
tion for comparison of the St. Anselm proof of the
existence of God.
There is one further question. Whether the Absolute
does or does not exist, is it, either in idea or reality, of
any use to us? The reply is that its value lies in this,
that it reveals to us the nature of reality and the mean-
ing of truth. Logic is the creative power of thought
which leads us to the discovery of higher and higher
degrees of reality. The Satyr, in the fable, drove his
guest from his shelter because the man blew into his
hands to warm them, and into his porridge to cool it.
The Satyr could not reconcile the contradiction that
one could with the same breath blow hot and cold.
Nor would he reconcile it ever, so long as he sought
truth as correspondence. Truth would have shown
the facts coherent by reconciling the contradiction in
a higher reality.


42 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
CHAPTER V
PRAGMATISM
J
The theory of the Absolute is only one form of Idealism,
but it illustrates the nature and general direction of
the development of philosophy along the line of specu-
lation that began with Kant. There have been, of
course, other directions. In particular many attempts
have been made to make philosophy an adjunct of
physical science, but the theory I have sketched is
characteristic of the prevailing movement in philosophy
during the last period of the Nineteenth Century, and
until the movement known as Pragmatism directed
criticism upon it. The form the pragmatical criticism
of the theory of the Absolute took was to direct atten-
tion to the logical or intellectual principle on which it
rests—in fact to raise the problem of the nature of truth.
Pragmatism is a theory of the meaning of-truth. It is
the denial of a purely logical criterion of truth, and the
insistence that truth is always dependent on psycho-
logical conditions. Pragmatism therefore rejects both
the views that we have examined—the theory that truth
is a correspondence of the idea with its object, and the
theory that it is the logical coherence and consistency
of the idea itself. It proposes instead the theory that
truth is always founded on a practical postulate, and
consists in the verification of that postulate; the verifi-
cation not being the discovery of something that was
waiting to be discovered, but the discovery that the
postulate that claims to be true is useful, in that it
works. Truth is what works.
The Absolute is reality and truth. The idealist
argument which we have followed was an attempt to


PRAGMATISM 48
determine the nature of reality, and not an attempt to
explain what we mean when we say that an idea agrees
with its object. What is true about reality? was the
starting point, and not, What is truth? nor even, What
is true about truth 2 The search for reality failed to
discover any object that agreed with its idea, but at
last there was found an idea that must agree with its
object, an idea whose object cannot not be. This idea,
the Absolute, reveals the nature of reality. The prag-
matist when he asks, What is truth? seems to dig
beneath the argument, seems indeed even to reach the
bedrock, but it is only in appearance that this is so.
How, indeed, could he hope to be able to answer the
question he has himself asked, if there is no way of
distinguishing the true answer from the false? We
must already know what truth is even to be able to
ask what it is—a point which many pragmatist writers
appear to me to have overlooked.
In challenging the idea of truth, the pragmatist raises
the no less important question of the nature of error.
A theory of truth must not only show in what truth
consists, but must distinguish false from true and show
the nature of error. The pragmatist claims for his
theory that it alone car/give a consistent account of
illusion and error. Now, as we saw in our account of
the idealist argument, it is the fact of illusion and error
that compels us to seek reality behind the appearances
that are the sense data of our conscious experience.
The whole force of the pragmatist movement in philo-
sophy is directed to proving that truth is a prior
consideration to reality. If we understand the nature
of truth, we shall see reality in the making. Reality
can in fact be left to look after itself; our business is
with our conceptions alone, which are either true or .
false. The distinction of appearance and reality dcee


44 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
not explain illusion and error because it does not dis-
tinguish between true and false appearance. There
is no principle in idealism by which the Absolute rejects
the false appearance and reconciles the true.
Before I examine the pragmatist argument, I ought
first to explain the meaning and origin of the word.
The term pragmatism, that has in the last few years
entered so widely into all philosophical discussion, was
used first by Mr. C. S. Peirce, an American philosopher,
in a magazine article written as long ago as 1878, but
it attracted no attention for nearly twenty years, when
it was recalled by William James in the criticism of
the current philosophy in his Will to Believe, a book
which marks the beginning of the new movement.
Pragmatism was first put forward as the principle that
the whole meaning of any conception expresses itself
in practical consequences. The conception of the
practical effects of a conception is the whole conception
of the object. The pragmatist maxim is—would you
know what any idea or conception means, then consider
what practical consequences are involved by its accept-
ance or rejection. Dr. Schiller, the leading exponent of
the principle in England, prefers to call the philosophy
"Humanism" in order still more to emphasize the
psychological and personal character of knowledge.
The name is suggested by the maxim of Protagoras,
"Man is the measure of all things." The term Intel-
lectualism is used by pragmatist writers to include all
theories of knowledge that do not agree with their own,
very much as the Greeks called all who were not Greeks,
Barbarians. It must not be taken to mean, as its
etymology would imply, a philosophy like that of
Plato, which held that only universals, the ideas, are
real, or like that of Hegel, who said that "the actual
-is-the rational and the rational is the actual." The


PRAGMATISM 45
pragmatists apply the term intellectualist to all philo-
sophers who recognise an objective character in the
logical ideal of truth, whether or not they also recognise
non-logical elements in reality, and whether or not
these non-logical elements are physical, such as matter
and energy, or purely psychical, such as will, desire,
emotion, pleasure, and pain.
Pragmatism is a criticism and a theory. If reality
in its full meaning is the Absolute, and if all seeming
reality is only a degree of or approximation to this full
reality, if the knowledge of this reality only is truth,
must it not seem to us that truth is useless knowledge 1
Useless, not in the sense that it is without value to the
mind that cares to contemplate it, but useless in so far
as the hard everyday working world in which we have
to spend our lives is concerned. We who have to win
our existence in the struggle of life, need truth. We
need truth in order to act. Truth that transcends our
temporal needs, truth that is eternal, truth that recon-
ciles illusion and error, that accepts them as a necessary
condition of appearance in time, is useless in practice,
however it may inspire the poet and philosopher. Truth
to serve us must reject error and not reconcile it, must
be a working criterion and not only a rational one.
Whatever truth is, it is not useless; it is a necessity
of life, not a luxury of speculation. Pragmatism there-
fore rejects the logical criterion of truth because it is
purely formal and therefore useless. It demands for
us a practical criterion, one that will serve our continual
needs. Whether our working ideas—cause, time, space,
movement, things and their qualities, terms and their
relations, and the like—are consistent or inconsistent
in themselves, they more or less work; and in so far as
they work they are useful and serve us, and because
they work, and just in so far as they work, they are true.


46 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
The pragmatist therefore declares that utility, not
logical consistency, is the criterion of truth. Ideas are
true in so far as they work. The discovery that they
serve us is their verification. If we discover ideas that
will serve us better, the old ideas that were true become
untrue, and the new ideas that we adopt become true
because they are found to work.
This doctrine of the verification or making true of
ideas leads to a theory of the origin of the ideas them-
selves. Each idea has arisen or been called forth by a
human need. It has been formed by human nature to
meet a need of human nature. It is a practical postu-
late claiming truth. Even the axioms that now seem
to us self-evident—such, for example, as the very law of
contradiction itself, from which, as we have seen, the
logical criterion of consistency is deduced—were in their
origin practical postulates, called forth by a need, and,
because found to work, true. The inconsistencies and
contradictions in our ideas do not condemn them as
appearance, and compel us to construct a reality in
which they disappear or are reconciled, but are evidence
of their origin in practical need and of their provisional
character. Truth is not eternal, it is changing. New
conditions are ever calling forth new ideas, and truths
become untrue. Each new idea comes forward with a
claim to truth, and its claim is tested by its practica-
bility. Truth is not something we discover, and which
was there to be discovered. We verify ideas. To
verify is not to find true but to make true.
The pragmatist theory therefore is that truth is made.
In all other theories truth is found. But if we make
truth we must make reality, for it is clear that if realitv
is there already, the agreement with it of man-made
truth would be nothing short of a miracle. The prag-
matist, or at all events the pragmAtist who is also a
^1


PRAGMATISM 47
humanist, finds no difficulty in accepting this conse-
quence of the theory, although at the same time in-
sisting that the whole problem of being as well as of
knowing is concerned with truth. We shall see, how-
ever, that it offers a serious difficulty to the acceptance
of the theory—a theory which in very many respects
agrees with ordinary practice and with scientific method.
Take, for example, scientific method. Is not all pro-
gress in science made by suggesting a hypothesis, and
testing it by experiment to see if it works? Do we not
judge its claim to truth by the practical consequences
involved in accepting or rejecting it? Is there any
other verification? This is the simple pragmatist test,
—does the laboratory worker add to it or find it in any
respect insufficient? If truth can be considered alone,
then we must admit that it is the attribute of knowledge
which is comprised under the term useful, the term
being used in its most comprehensive meaning to include
every kind of practical consequence. It is the question
of reality that raises the difficulty for the scientific
worker. We cannot believe, or perhaps we should say,
the ordinary man and the scientific man would find it
very difficult to believe, that reality changes corre-
spondingly with our success or failure in the verification
of our hypothesis. When the scientific worker verifies
his hypothesis, he feels not that he has made something
true which before was not true, but that he has dis-
covered what always was true, although until the dis-
covery he did not know it. To this the pragmatist
reply is, that this very belief is a practical consequence
involved in the verification of the hypothesis, involved
in the discovery that it works. What he denies is that
truth reveals, or ever can reveal, a reality entirely irrele-
vant to any human purpose. It is also very important
to add that in declaring that truth is verification, the


48 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
pragmatist does not set up a purely practical or utili-
tarian standard. The "working" of truth means
theoretical as well as practical working. Much of the
current criticism of pragmatism has failed to take notice
of this intention or meaning of its principle, and hence
the common misapprehension that the maxim "truth is
what works " must mean that whatever a man believes is
for him truth.
The pragmatist doctrine and attitude will perhaps be
easier to understand if we take it in regard to a par-
ticular instance of truth and error in regard to funda-
mental notions. In the last four or five years a new
principle has been formulated in Physics, named the
Principle of Relativity. It revolutionises the current
conceptions of space and time. It is so recent that
probably some of my readers now hear of it for the first
time, and therefore before I refer to its formulation by
mathematicians I will give a simple illustration to ex-
plain what it is. Suppose that you are walking up and
down the deck of a steamer, and let us suppose that
the steamer is proceeding at the speed of four miles an
hour, the space that you cover and the interval of time
that you occupy are exactly the same for you whether
you are moving up the deck in the direction the steamer
is going or down the deck in the direction which is the
reverse of the steamer's movement. But suppose some
one on the shore could observe you moving while the
ship was invisible to him, your movement would appear
to him entirely different to what it is to you. When
you were walking up the deck you would seem to be
going at twice the speed you would be going, and when
you were going down the deck you would seem not to
be moving at all. The time measurement would also
seem different to the observer on the shore, for while
to you each moment would be measured by an equal


PRAGMATISM 49
space covered, to him one moment you would be
moving rapidly, the next at rest. This is simple and
easy to understand. Now suppose that both you and
the observer were each observing a natural phenomenon,
say a thunder-storm, it would seem that each of you
ought to observe it with a difference—a difference
strictly calculable from the system of movement, the
ship, in which you were placed in relation to him. The
propagation of the sound and of the light would have
to undergo a correction if each of you described your
experience to the other. If you were moving in the
direction of the light waves they would be slower for
you than for him, and if against their direction they
would be faster for you than for him. Of course the
immense velocity of the light waves, about 200,000 miles
a second, would make the difference in a movement of
four miles an hour so infinitesimal as to be altogether
inappreciable, but it would not be nothing, and you
would feel quite confident that if it could be measured
the infinitesimal quantity would appear in the result.
Now suppose that we could measure it with absolute
accuracy, and that the result was the discovery that the
supposed difference did not exist at all—and of course,
we suppose that there is no doubt whatever about the
measurement—what, then, should we be obliged to
think 1 We should be forced to believe that as the
velocity of light was the same for the two observers,
one moving, one at rest, therefore the space and the
time must be different for each. Now, however strange
it may seem, such a measurement has been made, and
with this surprising result. In consequence there has
been formulated a new principle in Physics named the
Principle of Relativity. I take this Principle of Re-
lativity for my illustration because it is based on reason-
ing that practically admits of no doubt, and because
D


50 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
it requires us to form new conceptions of space and
time which seem to alter fundamentally what we have
hitherto considered as the evident and unmistakable
nature of those realities. It has always seemed that
the distance separating two points, and the interval of
time separating two events, were each independent of
the other and each absolute. However different the
distance and the interval may appear to observers in
movement or to observers in different systems of move-
ment in relation to ourselves and to one another, in
themselves they are the same distance and the same
interval for all. They are the same for the man in the
express train as for the man standing on the station
platform. The Principle of Relativity requires us to
think that this is not so, but that, contrary to all our
settled notions, the actual space and time vary—really
undergo an alteration, a contraction or expansion—with
each different system of movement of translation to
which the observer is bound. Events that for an
observer belonging to one system of movement happen
in the same place, for another observer in a different
system of movement happen in different places. Events
that for one observer happen simultaneously, for other
observers are separated by a time interval according
to the movement of translation of the system to which
they belong. So that space, which Newton described
as rigid, and time which he described as flowing at a
constant rate, and which for him was absolute, are for
the new theory relative, different for an observer in
every different system of movement of translation. Or
we may state it in the opposite way, and say that the
Principle of Relativity shows us that the reason why
natural phenomena, such as the rate of propagation of
light, undergo no alteration when we pass from one
system of movement of translation to another, as we


PRAGMATISM 51
are constantly doing in the changing velocity of the
earth's movement round the sun, is that space and time
alter with the velocity. I cannot here give the argu-
ment or describe the experiments which have given
this result—I am simply taking it as an illustration.1
It seems to me admirably suited to compare the prag-
matist method and the pragmatist attitude with that
of scientific realism and of absolute idealism.
Here, then, is a question in which the truth of our
accepted notions is called in question, and new notions
claim to be true. The sole question involved, prag-
matism insists, is the truth of conceptions, not the
reality of things, and there is but one way of testing the
truth of conceptions—and that is by comparing the
rival conceptions in respect of the practical conse-
quences that follow from them and adopting those that
will work. If the old conceptions of space and time fail
to conform to a new need, then what was true before
the need was revealed is no longer true, the new con-
ception has become true. By verifying the new con-
ception, we make it true. But, objects the realist, an
idea cannot become true; what is now true always was <
true, and what is no longer true never was true, though
we may have worked with the false notion ignorant
that it was false. Behind truth there is reality. The
earth was spherical even when all mankind believed it
flat and found the belief work. To this the pragmatist
reply is that reality is only our objectification of truth;
it possesses no meaning divorced from human purposes.
Had anyone announced that the earth was a sphere"
1 The Principle of Relativity is mainly the result of the recent
mathematical work of H. A. Lorentz, Einstein, and thelate Professor
Minkowski. A very interesting and not excessively difficult account
of it is contained in Derniira Peniies, by the late Henri Poincare';
Paris, Alcan.
!


52 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
when it was generally held to be flat, unless his an-
nouncement had some relevance to a defect in the flat
earth notion, or a claim to revise that notion, his
announcement would have been neither a truth nor a
falsehood in any intelligible meaning of the term—he
would have been making an irrelevant remark. The
notions of space and time that Newton held worked,
and were therefore true; if a new need requires us to
replace them with other notions, and these other
notions will work and are therefore true, they have be-
come true and Newton's notions have become false. If
it is still objected that the new notions were also true
for Newton, although he was ignorant of them, the need
for them not having arisen, the only reply is that truth,
or reality, in complete detachment from human pur-
poses, cannot be either affirmed or denied.
With this view the idealist will be in agreement; his
objection is of a different kind. He rejects, as the
pragmatist does, the notion of a reality independent of
human nature that forces upon us the changes that our
conceptions undergo. These changes, he holds, are
the inner working of the conceptions themselves, the
manifestation of our intellectual nature, ever striving
for an ideal of logical consistency. Truth is this ideal.
We do not make it; we move towards it. If we compare,
then, the idealist and the pragmatist doctrine, it will
seem that, while for the idealist truth is growing with
advancing knowledge into an ever larger because more
comprehensive system of reality, for the pragmatist
it is ever narrowing, discarding failures as useless and
irrelevant to present purpose. How indeed, the idealist
will ask, if practical consequences be the meaning of
truth, is it possible to understand that knowledge has
advanced or can advance? Does not the history of
science prove a continual expansion, an increasing


PRAGMATISM 53
comprehension? It is within the conception that the
inconsistency is revealed, not in any mere outward use
of the conceptions, and the intellectual effort is to
reconcile the contradiction by relating the conception
to a more comprehensive whole. How, then, does the
idealist meet this case which we have specially instanced,
the demand for new notions of space and time made by
the Principle of Relativity? He denies that the new
conceptions are called forth by human needs in the
narrow sense—that is to say, in the sense that working
hypotheses or practical postulates are required. The
need is purely logical. The inconsistency revealed in
the notions that have hitherto served us can only be
reconciled by apprehending a higher unity. If the
older notions of space and time are inadequate to the
more comprehensive view of the universe as a co-
ordination of systems of movement, then this very
negation of the older notions is the affirmation of the
new, and from the negation by pure logic the content
and meaning which are the truth of the new notions
are derived. To this objection the pragmatist reply
is that if this be the meaning of the truth there is no
way shown by which it can be distinguished from error.
There is in fact for idealism no error, no illusion, nor
falsehood; as real facts, there are only degrees of truth.
But a theory of truth which ignores such stubborn!
realities as illusion, falsehood, and error is, from what-
ever standpoint we view it, useless. On the other
hand, pragmatism offers a test by which we can discrimi-
nate between true and false—namely, the method of
judging conceptions by their practical consequences. (
Can we or can we not make our conceptions work?
That is the whole meaning of asking, Are they true or
false? And now, lest the reader is alarmed at the pros-
pect of having to revise his working ideas of space and


54 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
time, I will, to reassure him, quote the words with which
Henri Poineare concluded his account of the new con-
ceptions, and which admirably express and illustrate
the pragmatist's attitude: "What is to be our position
in view of these new conceptions? Are we about to
be forced to modify our conclusions? No, indeed:
we had adopted a convention because it seemed to us
convenient, and we declared that nothing could compel
us to abandon it. To-day certain physicists wish to
adopt a new convention. Ifc is not because they are
compelled to; they judge this new convention to be
more convenient—that is all; and those who are not of
tbis opinion can legitimately keep the old and so leave
their old habits undisturbed. I think, between ourselves,
that tbis is what they will do for a long time to come."
I have so far considered pragmatism rather as a
criticism than as a doctrine. I will now try and charac-
terise it on its positive side. It declares that there is
no such thing as pure thought, but that all thinking is
personal and purposive; that all knowing is directed,
controlled, and qualified by psychological conditions
such as interest, attention, desire, emotion, and the like;
and that we cannot, as formal logic does, abstract from
any of these, for logic itself is part of a psychical process.
Truth therefore depends upon belief; truths are matters
of belief, and beliefs are rules of action. It is this
doctrine that gives to pragmatism its paradoxical, some
have even said its grotesque, character. It seems to say
that the same proposition is both true and false—true for
the man who believes it, false for the man who cannot.
It seems to say that we can make anything true by
believing it, and we can believe anything so long as the
consequences of acting on it are not absolutely disastrous.
And the proposition, All truths work, seems to involve
the conclusion that all that works is true; and the
proposition, The true is the useful, seems to imply that


UTILITY 55
whatever is useful is therefore true. No small part of
the pragmatist controversy has been directed to the
attempt to show that all and each of these corollaries
are, or arise from, misconceptions of the doctrine. I
think, and I shall endeavour to show, that there is a
serious defect in the pragmatist statement, and that
these misconceptions are in a great part due to it.
Nevertheless, we must accept the pragmatist disavowal.
And there is no difficulty in doing so, for the meaning j
of the theory is sufficiently clear. Truth, according to i\
pragmatism, is a value and not a fact. Truth is thus
connected with the conception of "good." In saying
that truth is useful, we say that it is a means to an end,
a good. It is not a moral end, but a cognitive end, \
just as "beauty" is an aesthetic end. Truth, beauty,
and goodness thus stand together as judgments of value
or worth. It is only by recognising that truth is a
value that we can possess an actual criterion to dis-
tinguish it from error, for if truth is a judgment of facts
if it asserts existence, so also does error.
The pragmatist principle has an important bearing
on religion. It justifies the Faith attitude. It shows
that the good aimed at by a "truth claim" is only
attainable by the exercise of the will to believe. Thus
it replaces the intellectual maxim, Believe in nothing you
can possibly doubt, with the practical maxim, Resolve
not to quench any impulse to believe because doubts of
the truth are possible. Belief may even be a condition
of the success of the truth claim.
CHAPTER VI
UTILITY
We have seen in the last chapter that pragmatism is
both a criticism and a theory. It shows us that the


56 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
\
notion that truth is correspondence involves the con-
ception of an " impossible " knowledge, and the notion
that truth is coherence or consistency involves the con-
ception of a "useless" knowledge. The explanation
pragmatism itself offers is of the kind that is called in
the technical language of philosophy teleological. This
means that to explain or to give a meaning to truth
all we can do is to point out the purpose on account of
which it exists. This is not scientific explanation.
Physical science explains a fact or an event by showing
the conditions which give rise to it or that determine
its character. Pragmatism recognises no conditions
determining truth such as those which science embodies
in the conception of a natural law—that is, the idea of
a connection of natural events with one another which
is not dependent on human thoughts about them nor
on human purposes in regard to them. Truth is in
intimate association with human practical activity; its
meaning lies wholly in its utility. We must therefore
now examine somewhat closely this notion of utility.
There appears to me to be a serious defect in the
pragmatist conception and application of the principle
of utility; it is based on a conception altogether too
narrow. A theory that condemns any purely logical
process as resulting in "useless" knowledge can only
justify itself by insisting on an application of the
principle of utility that will be found to exclude not
merely the Absolute of philosophy but most if not all
of the results of pure mathematics and physics, for these
sciences apply a method of pure logical deduction and
induction indistinguishable from that which pragmatism
condemns. The intellectual nature of man is an en-
dowment which sharply distinguishes him from other
forms of living creatures. So supreme a position does
our intellect assign to us, so wide is the gap that separates


UTILITY 57
us from other creatures little different from ourselves
in respect of perfection of material organisation and
adaptation to environment, that it seems almost natural
to suppose that our intellect is that for which we exist,
and not merely a mode of controlling, directing, and
advancing our life. Now it is possible to hold—and this
is the view that I shall endeavour in what follows to
develop—that the intellect is subservient to life, and that
we can show the manner and method of its Working and
the purpose it serves. So far we may agree with the
pragmatist, but it is not the same thing to say that the
intellect serves a useful purpose and to say that truth,
the ideal of the intellect, the end which it strives for, is
itself only a utility. Were there no meaning in truth
except that it is what works, were there no meaning
independent of and altogether distinct from the practical
consequences of belief, of what value to us would the
intellect be? If the meaning the intellect assigns to
truth is itself not true, how can the intellect serve us?
The very essence of its service is reduced to nought; for
what else but the conception of an objective truth, a
logical reality independent of any and every psycho-
logical condition, is the utility that the intellect puts
us in possession of? It is this conception alone that
constitutes it an effective mode of activity. Therefore,
if we hold with the pragmatist that the intellect is sub-
servient to life, truth is indeed a utility, but it is a
utility just because it has a meaning distinct from use-
fulness. On the other hand, to condemn any know-
ledge as " useless " is to deny utility to the intellect.
Before I try to show that the logical method of the
idealist philosophy, which pragmatism condemns because
it leads to "useless" knowledge, is identical in every
respect with the method employed in pure mathematics
and physics, I will give for comparison two illustrations


58 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
that seem to me instances of a narrow #nd of a wide
use of the concept of utility.
A short time ago an orang-utang escaped from its
cage in the Zoological Gardens under somewhat singu-
lar and very interesting circumstances. The cage was
secured with meshed wire of great strength, judged
sufficient to resist the direct impact of the most powerful
of the carnivora; but the ape, by attention to the twisting
of the plied wire, had by constant trying succeeded in
loosening and finally in unwinding a large section. It
escaped from its enclosure, and after doing considerable
damage in the corridor, including the tearing out of a
window frame, made its way into the grounds and took
refuge in a tree, twisting the branches into a platform
said to be similar to the constructions it makes in its
native forests.
In taking this action as an illustration, I am not con-
cerned with the question of what may be the distinction
between action that is intelligent and action that is
instinctive. If we take intelligence in a wide and general
meaning, we may compare the intelligence shown by this
ape with the intelligence shown by man in the highest
processes of the mind. Psychologists would, I think,
be unanimous in holding that in the mind of the ape
there was no conception of freedom, no kind of mental
image of unrestricted life and of a distinct means of
attaining it, no clearly purposed end, the means of
attaining which was what prompted the undoing of the
wire, such as we should certainly suppose in the case of
a man in a similar situation. It was the kind of intelli-
gent action that psychologists denote by the description
"trial and error." It seems to me, however, that this
exactly fulfils the conditions that the pragmatist doctrine
of the meaning of truth require. We see the intellect
of the ape making true by finding out what works.


UTILITY 59
We can suppose an entire absence of the idea of objective
truth to which reality must conform, of truth unaffected
by purpose. Here, then, we seem to have the pure type
of truth in its simplest conditions, a practical activity
using intelligence to discover what works. Is the differ-
ence between this practical activity and the higher mental
activities as we employ them in the abstract sciences one
of degree of complexity only, or is it different in kind?
Let us consider now, as an illustration of the method
of the abstract sciences, the well-known case of the
discovery of the planet Neptune. This planet was
discovered by calculation and deduction, and was only
seen when its position had been so accurately deter-
mined that the astronomers who searched for it knew
exactly the point of the heavens to which to direct their
telescopes. The calculation was one of extraordinary
intricacy, and was made independently by two mathe-
maticians, Adams of Cambridge and Leverrier of i'aris,
between the years 1843 and 1846. Each communi-
cated his result independently—Adams to the astrono-
mer Challis, the Director of the Cambridge Observatory,
and Leverrier to Dr. Galle of the Berlin Observatory.
Within six weeks of one another and entirely unknown
to one another, in August and September 1846, each of
these astronomers observed the planet where he had
been told to look for it. This is one of the romances
of modern science. It is not the discovery but the
method that led to it which may throw light on our
problem of the nature of truth.
At first sight this seems exactly to accord with and
even to illustrate the pragmatist theory, that truth is
what works. The investigation is prompted by the
discrepancies between the actual and the calculated
positions of Uranus, the outermost planet, as it was then
supposed, of the system. This revealed a need, and this


€0 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
need was met by the practical postulate of the exist-
ence of another planet as yet unseen. The hypothesis
was found to work even before the actual observation
put the final seal of actuality on the discovery. What
else but the practical consequences of the truth claim
in the form of the hypothesis of an undiscovered planet
were ever in question? Yes, we reply, but the actual
method adopted, and the knowledge sought for by the
method, are precisely of the kind that pragmatism
rejects as "useless" knowledge. Why were not the
observed movements of Uranus accepted as what they
were? Why was it felt that they must be other than
they were seen to be unless there was another planet?
The need lay in the idea of system. It was inconsistent
with the system then believed complete, and the need
was to find the complete system in which it would
harmonise. The truth that was sought for was a har-
monious individual whole, and the method employed
precisely that which the Absolutist theory of reality
employs. There is observed a discrepancy, an incon-'
sistency, a contradiction within the whole conceived as
a system. This negation is treated as a defect, is
calculated and accurately determined, and is then posi-
tively affirmed of the reality. Now, what is distinctive
in this method is that reality is conceived as a complete
system. If the felt defect in this system cannot be
made good by direct discovery, its place is supplied by
a fiction, using the term in its etymological meaning to
express something made and not in its derived meaning
to express something found false. This intellectual
process of construction is purely logical; no psycho-
logical element in the sense of the will to believe enters
into it or colours it in any way
This is not an isolated instance, it illustrates the
method of science in all theorising. An even more


UTILITY 61
striking illustration than that we have just given is the
case of the hypothesis of the luminiferous aether—a
supposed existence, a fiction, that has served a useful,
even an indispensable service in the history of modern
physics. To many physicists, even to Lord Kelvin, the
hypothesis seemed so surely established that its non-
existence hardly seemed thinkable, yet all the experi-
ments designed to detect its presence have been uni-
formly negative in result, and it now seems not even
necessary as a hypothesis, and likely to disappear. The
aether was not only not discovered, it was not even
suspected to exist, as in the case of the unknown planet
Neptune—it was logically constructed. It was required
to support the theory of the undulatory nature of light
and to fulfil the possibility of light propagation in space.
It was therefore a postulate, called forth by a need—
so far we may adopt the pragmatist account. But
what was the nature of the need, and what was the
method by which the postulate was called forth 1 It
is in answering this question that the pragmatist
criterion fails. The need was intellectual in the purely
logical meaning of the term, and it was met by a purely
logical construction. The need was a practical human
need only in so far as the intellect working by logical
process is a human endowment but not in any personal
sense such as is conveyed by the term psychological.
Willingness or unwillingness to believe, desire, aversion,
interest were all irrelevant. Given the intellect, the
logical necessity was the only need that called forth by
logical process the "truth-claiming" hypothesis of the
aether. But even so, the pragmatist will urge, is its
truth anything else but its usefulness as shown in the
practical consequences of believing it? Was it not
true while it was useful, and is it not only now false, if
it is false, if it is actually discovered not to be useful?


62 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
The reply is that no mathematician or physicist would
recognise the possibility of working with a conception
of truth that simply identified truth with utility, and
for this reason that he can only conceive reality as a
system whose truth is symbolised in an equation. It
is the system that determines and characterises the
postulate, and not the postulate advanced at a venture,
tried and verified, that constitutes the system. The
mathematician begins by placing symbols to represent
the unknown factors in his equation, and proceeds by
means of his known factors to determine their value.
The aether is at first a pure fiction constructed to supply
an unknown existence recognised as a defect. Its truth
cannot mean that it works for it cannot but work,
having been constructed purely for that purpose. Its
truth means that it corresponds to some actual exist-
ence at present unknown. To prove its truth the
physicist does not appeal to its value as a hypothesis,
but devises experiments by which, if it does exist, its
existence will be demonstrated. In this actual case the
experiments have had a uniformly negative result, and
therefore the truth of the hypothesis is made doubtful
or denied. The hypothesis continues to work as well
as it ever did, and physicists will probably long con-
tinue to use it, but it has failed to establish its truth
claim. The result is the modern Principle of Relativity,
which, as we have already said, has produced a revolu-
tion in modern physics. The abolition of the aether
would have been impossible if the physicist had been
content with the utility of his hypothesis and had not
experimented to prove its truth. The relation between
truth and utility is thus proved to be that it is useful
to know what is true. *'
These two illustrations of scientific method—namely,
the discovery of Neptune and the negative discovery


UTILITY 68
that the sether is non-existent—make it evident that
verification is the intellectual process not of making
true, but of finding true. We can, indeed, distinguish
quite clearly the two processes. The first process, that
of making true, is the constructing of the fiction by
which we complete an incomplete system, and the
second is the testing of that fiction to see if it corre-
sponds to anything actually existing. No kind of intel-
lectual activity will make an idea true, and conversely
we may say that were truth only a utility, then know-
ledge instead of being systematic would be chaotic.
Existence has its roots in reality, not in knowledge.
Reality does not depend on truth. Truth is the intel-
lectual apprehension of reality.
If the pragmatist objects that in this argument I
have throughout supposed him to be urging the narrow
meaning of utility, namely, that it is usefulness in the
strictly practical sense, whereas he intends it in the
widest possible meaning—a meaning that includes
theoretical usefulness—then the trouble is a different
one; it is to know how and where the pragmatist stops
short of the coherence theory of truth, and wherein his
method differs from that of the idealist.
This brings me to the consideration of another theory
in which the concept of utility plays a large, indeed a
predominant part. This is the theory of the relation
of knowledge to life that is given to us in the philosophy
of Bergson. I have in one of the volumes of this series
given an account of this philosophy; I am here only deal-
ing with its relation to this special problem of the nature
of truth. It has been claimed that this philosophy is
only a form of pragmatism, but it is not a theory of
truth, and it has this essential difference from prag-
matism that it is the intellect and not truth that is a
utility. Before we consider the question that it gives


64 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
rise to in regard to truth, let us first examine the theory
of the intellect, and the nature of its utility. The in-
tellect is a mode of activity, an endowment acquired
in the course of evolution, and which has been retained
and perfected because of its utility. This does not
mean that the intellect directs us to what is useful and
inhibits us from courses fatal to life, neither does it
mean that it gives us any power to make true what is
not already true, it means that the power to acquire
knowledge is useful. There is a contrast in our own
existence between our life and our intellect.
To understand the way in which the intellect serves
the living creature endowed with it, we need only regard
it from the standpoint of ordinary experience. We
know in ourselves that our life is wider than our intellect,
and that our intellect serves the activity of our life.
The common expressions we employ, such as using our
wits, taking an intelligent interest, trying to think, all
imply a utility distinct from the intellect. So viewed,
our life appears as an active principle within us, main-
taining our organism in its relations, active and passive,
and reactive to the reality outside and independent of
it. Our intellect also seems both active and passive.
It receives the influences that stream in upon us from
the reality around us, it apprehends and interprets
them, and works out the lines of our possible action in
regard to them. The influences that flow in upon us
from the outside world are already selected before our
intellect apprehends them, for they flow in by the
avenues of our senses, and the senses are natural instru-
ments of selection. If we picture these influences as
vibrations, then we may say that a certain group of
vibrations of a very rapid frequency are selected by
the eye and give rise to vision, that another group of very
much lower frequency are selected by the ear and


UTILITY 65
give the sensation of sound, and other groups are
selected by taste, smell, and touch. Many groups are
known indirectly by means of artificial instruments,
and all the infinite series that unite these groups of the
actually experienced vibrations escape our apprehen-
sion altogether—we have no means of selecting them.
But all these sense data, as we may call them, come to
us without exertion or activity on our part; it is the
intellect which gives them meaning, which interprets
them, which makes them the apprehension or aware-
ness of objects or things. And the active part that the
intellect plays is also a process of selection. This is
evident if we reflect upon the universal form which our
intellectual activity takes, namely, attention. It is in
the act of attention that we are conscious of mental
activity, and attention is essentially selection—the selec-
tion of an interest. Besides the natural selection that
is effected by our senses and the conscious selection that
is manifest in attention, there is also a more or less
arbitrary selection that our intellect performs in mark-
ing out the lines of our practical interest and possible
action. In this work of selection the intellect makes
the world conform to the necessities of our action.
So far we have looked at our intellectual endowment
from the standpoint of ordinary common-sense experi-
ence. Let us now consider the philosophical theory
based on this view, which explains the nature of know-
ledge by showing its purpose. The intellect not only
selects, but in selecting transforms the reality. It
presents us with knowledge that indeed corresponds
with reality, for it is essentially a view of reality, but also
in selecting it marks out divisions, and gives to reality
a form that is determined by practical interest. The
same reality is different to different individuals and to
different species according to their practical interests.


66 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
The practical end which the human intellect serves is
to present us with a field for our life activity. This
is the real world for us, as we know it, real objects in a
real space. Had we no other way of knowing but that
of our intellect we should not know the life which is
active within us as it is really lived, we should be as
those who, standing outside, watch a movement, and
not as those who are carried along in the movement
and experience it from within. In life and intellect we
have the counterpart of reality and appearance. Life
is not something that changes; it is the change of which
the something is the appearance. Life is the reality of
which all things, as we understand them, are the appear-
ances, and on account of which they appear. The solid
things in space and time are not in reality what they
appear; they are views of the reality. The intellect
guided by our practical interest presents reality under
this form of solid spatial things. Clearly, then, if this
view be true, the whole world, as it is presented to us
and thought of by us, is an illusion. Our science is not
unreal, but it is a transformed reality. The illusions
may be useful, may, indeed, be necessary and indis-
pensable, but nevertheless it is illusion.
But here there arises a new difficulty in regard to
truth. If the usefulness of the intellect consists in the
active production of an illusion, can we say that the
intellect leads us to truth? Is it not only if we can
turn away from the intellect and obtain a non-intellectual
intuition that we can know truth?


ILLUSION 67
CHAPTER VII
ILLUSION
The doctrine that the. world that appears is essentially
unlike the world that is is neither new nor peculiar to any
particular theory of philosophy. It has received a new
interest and a new interpretation lately in the theory
that we are now considering, that the clue to the appear-
ance of the world to us is to be found in the conception
of the nature of the utility of the intellect and in the
mode of its activity. The idea that we are perhaps
disqualified by our very nature itself from beholding
reality and knowing truth is illustrated in the well-
known allegory in the Republic of Plato:
"And now let me show in a figure how far our
nature is enlightened or unenlightened. Behold! human
beings living in an underground den, which has a mouth
open towards the light and reaching all along the den;
here they have been from their childhood, and have
their legs and necks chained so that they cannot move
and can only see before them, being prevented by the
chains from turning round their heads. Above and
behind them a fire is blazing at a distance, and between
the fire and the prisoners there is a raised way; and you
will see, if you look, a low wall built along the way, like
the screen which marionette players have in front of
them, over which they show the puppets. And men are
passing along the wall carrying all sorts of vessels, and
statues, and figures of animals made of wood and stone
and various materials, which appear over the wall. . . .
"They are strange prisoners, like ourselves, and they
see only their own shadows or the shadows of one
another which the fire throws on the opposite wall' of
the cave. And so also of the objects carried and of the
passers-by; to the prisoners the truth would be literally
nothing but the shadows of the images.


68 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
"And now look again, and see what will naturally
follow if the prisoners are released and disabused of
their error. At first, when any of them is liberated and
compelled suddenly to stand up and turn his neck round
and walk and look towards the light, he will suffer sharp
pains; the glare will distress him, and he will be unable
to see the realities of which in his former state he had
seen the shadows. And then conceive someone saying
to him that what he saw before was an illusion, but
that now, when he is approaching nearer to being, and
his eye is turned towards more real existence, he has
a clearer vision, and what will be his reply? Will he
not fancy that the shadows which he formerly saw
are truer than the objects which are now shown to
him «...
"And suppose that he is forced into the presence of
the sun himself, is he not likely to be pained and irritated?
When he approaches the light his eyes will be dazzled,
and he will not be able to see anything at all of what
are now called realities."
The thought that Plato has expressed in this wonder-
ful allegory has entered deeply into all philosophy.
What we first take for reality is merely a shadow world.
But in Plato's view it is the intellect which gives us the
means of escape, the power to turn from the illusion to
behold the reality. It is not until now that philosophy
has sought the clue to the illusion in the nature of the
intellect itself. The very instrument of truth is unfitted
to reveal to us the reality as it is, because its nature
and purpose is to transform reality, to make reality
appear in a form which, though of paramount importance
to us as active beings, is essentially an illusion. The
intellectual bent of our mind leads us away from, and not
towards a vision of reality in its purity. The more our
intellect progresses, and the more'and more clearly we


ILLUSION 69
see into a greater and ever greater number of things,
the farther are we from, snd not the nearer to a grasp
of reality as it is. To obtain this vision of reality we .
have to turn away from the intellect and find ourselves V
again in that wider life out of which the intellect is
formed. Life, as it lives, is an intuition that is non-
intellectual.
"Human intelligence," writes Bergson, "is not at
all what Plato taught in the allegory of the cave. Its
function is not to look at passing shadows, nor yet to
turn itself round and contemplate the glaring sun. It
has something else to do. Harnessed, like yoked oxen,
to a heavy task, we feel the play of our muscles and
joints, the weight of the plough, and the resistance of the
soil. To act and to know that we are acting, to come
into touch with reality and even to live it, but only in
the measure in which it concerns the work that is being
accomplished and the furrow that is being ploughed,
such is the function of human intelligence."
The illusion to which our intellectual nature subjects
us is the necessity we are under to regard the things of
the universe as more ultimate, as more fundamental
than the movement which actuates the universe. It
seems to us impossible that there could exist movement
or change, unless there already existed things to be
moved or changed, things whose nature is not altered,
but only their form and their external relations, when
they are moved or changed. This necessity of thought'
seems to have received authoritative recognition in all
attempts, religious and scientific, to conceive origins.
Thus we read in the Book of Genesis:
"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness
was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved
upon the face of the waters."


70 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
The matter of the universe, it is felt, must be in existence
before the movement which vivifies it. The dead inert
stuff must be created before it can receive the breath
of life. And if God the creator is conceived as living
before the matter which He has created, it is as an ex-
ternal principle, the relation of which to the creation
is by most religious minds thought to transcend the
power of the finite understanding to conceive.
The same fundamental conception of the primacy
of matter over movement is evident in the scientific
theories of the nature and origin of life. Life appears
to science as a form of energy that requires things,
matter occupying space, to support it. According to
one view, life is the result of a certain combination or
synthesis of chemical or physical elements, previously
existing separately—a combination of very great com-
plexity, and one that may possibly have occurred once
only in the long process of nature, but which neverthe-
less might be, and some think probably, or even certainly,
will be brought about by a chemist working in his
laboratory. This is the mechanistic or materialist, view.
On the other hand, there is the theory of vitalism.
Life, it is contended, cannot be due to such a synthesis
of material elements as the mechanistic view supposes,
because it is of the nature of an "entelechy "—that is,
an individual existence whioh functions, as a whole, in
every minutest part of the organism it "vitalises."
Life has supervened upon, and not arisen out of the
material organism which it guides and controls not by
relating independent parts, but by making every part
subserve the activity and unity of the whole. But the
vitalist theory, as well as the mechanistic theory, con-
ceives the movement and change whioh is life as de-
pendent on the previous existence of a matter or stuff
which is moved or changed. The philosophical con-


ILLUSION' 71
ception differs, therefore, from both these theories. It
is that life is an original movement, and that this
movement is the whole reality of which things, inert
matter, even spatial extension, are appearances. True
duration is change, not the permanence of something
amidst change. There are no unchanging things.
Everything changes. Reality is the flux; things are
views of the flux, arrests or contractions of the flowing
that the intellect makes. The appearance of the world
to us is our intellectual grasp of a reality that flows.
This original movement is the life of the universe.
Briefly stated, the argument on which the theory is
based is that it is logically impossible to explain change
by changelessness, movement by immobility. Real
change cannot be a succession of states themselves
fixed and changeless; real movement cannot be the
immobile positions in which some thing is successively
at rest. On the other hand, if movement is original, the
interruption of movement, in whatever way effected,
will appear as things. The experience which confirms
this argument is the insight that everyone may obtain
of the reality of his own life as continuous movement,
unceasing change, wherein all that exists exists to-
gether in a present activity. To develop this argument
would exceed the limits of this book, and would be
outside its purpose. It is essential, however, that such
a theory should be understood, for clearly it is possible
to hold not only that we are subject to illusion, but
that illusion is of the very nature of intellectual appre-
hension. If, then, the understanding works illusion for
the sake of action, is it thereby disqualified as an instru-
ment for the attainment of truth?
We are brought, then, to the critical point of our
inquiry. If illusion is the essential condition of human
activity, if the intellect, the very instrument of truth,


72 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
is itself affected, what is to save us from universal
scepticism? If the salt have lost his savour, where-
with shall it be salted? The intellect with its frames
and moulds shapes living change and movement into
fixed immobile states; the process of knowing alters
profoundly the reality known. Must we not conclude
that knowledge, however useful, is not true? And to
what shall we turn for truth? There is, indeed, if this
be so, a deeper irony in the question, What is truth?
than even Pilate could have imagined. We have abso-
lutely no practical concern with truth—we must leave it
to the mystic, to the unpractical, the contemplative man
who has turned aside from the stern task of busy life.
It is not so. The problem that seems so fundamental
admits a quite simple solution. Illusion is not error,
nor is it falsehood; it is the appearance of reality. It is
the reality that appears, and when we grasp the prin-
ciple of utility we understand the shape that the ap-
pearance must assume. This shape may seem to us a
distortion, but in recognising appearance we are in
touch with reality, and practical interest is the key that
opens to us the interpretation of intellectual experience.
And it is not only by the intellect that we interpret the
nature of reality, for besides logic there is life, and in
life we directly perceive the reality that in logic we
think about.
The intellect, then, does not make truth, neither does
it make reality; it makes reality take the form of spatial
things, and it makes things seem to be the ground of
reality. Were our nature not intellectual, if all con-
sciousness was intuitive, the world would not then
appear as things—there would be no things. But, not-
withstanding that our world is an illusion, it is not the
less on that account a true world, and our science is
true knowledge, in the objective meaning of truth, for


ILLUSION 73
once an illusion is interpreted, it becomes an integral
part of the conception of reality. It would be easy to
find abundant illustration of this fact within science
itself. Thus in the familiar case of the straight stick
which appears bent when partly immersed in water, as
soon as the illusion is understood as due to the different
refraction of light in media of different density, air and
water, it ceases to be an illusion. We then recognise
that if a partly immersed stick did not appear bent, it
would really be bent. Again, the illusion that clings to
us most persistently throughout our experience is that
which is connected with movement and rest. The
system of movement in which we are ourselves carried
along appears to us stationary, while that which is out-
side it seems alone to move. In very simple cases,
such as viewing the landscape from a railway-carriage
window, habit has long caused the illusion to cease,
but we all remember the child's feeling that the trees
and fields were flying past us. The earth's motion
never becomes to us a real experience of movement, we
accept the fact and never doubt the scientific evidence
on which it rests, yet we always speak and think of
sunrise and sunset; and this is not merely due to the
accident that our language was fixed before the nature
of the celestial movement was known, but to a natural.
illusion which it is far more convenient to retain than
to abandon.
The fact of illusion is not the tenet of any particular
philosophy, nor even of philosophy itself; it is a recog-
nised factor in common fife and in physical science,
but in instancing the theory of Bergson's philosophy
I am choosing an extreme case. Berkeley held that
illusion is practically universal; Kant taught that the
apparent objectivity of phenomena is the form that the
understanding imposes on things; but Bergson teaches


74 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
not only that all material reality is illusion, but also
that this very illusion is the work of the intellect, that
the intellect is formed for this purpose, intellect and
matter being correlative, evolving pari passu. To such
a doctrine there is of necessity a positive side, for it is
impossible that it can rest on universal scepticism—
scepticism both of knowledge and of the instrument of
knowledge. If the intellectual view of reality as solid
matter in absolute space is illusion, it must be possible
to apprehend the reality from which the judgment that
it is illusion is derived. If the intellect distorts, there
must be an intuition which is pure, and the relation
between these will be the relation between reality and
. appearance. Neither, then, is reality truth, nor appear-
ance error. There is a truth of appearance, a truth
that is a value in itself, a truth that is more than the
mere negation that appearance is not reality. The ap-
pearance is our hold upon the reality, our actual con-
tact with it, the mode and direction of our action upon it.
What, then, is error? It cannot consist in the fact
that we know appearance only, not reality, for we can
only know reality by its appearance. It cannot be an
appearance behind which there is no reality, for non-
being cannot appear. It cannot be nothing at all or
pure non-being, for to think of absolute nothing is not
to think. In error there is some object of thought
which is denied real being. What this is is the problem
of error.
CHAPTER VIII
THE PROBLEM OF EEBOB
In the Thecetetus of Plato, Socrates has been discussing
with Theaetetus what knowledge is, and when at last
agreement seems to be reached in the definition that


THE PROBLEM OF ERROR 75
knowledge is true opinion, a new difficulty occurs to
Socrates:
"There is a point which often troubles me and is a
great perplexity to me both in regard to myself and to
others. I cannot make out the nature or origin of the
mental experience to which I refer. How there can be
false opinion—that difficulty still troubles the eye of
my mind. Do we not speak of false opinion, and say
that one man holds a false and another a true opinion,
as though there were some natural distinction between
them? All things and everything are either known or
not known. He who knows, cannot but know; and he
who does not know, cannot know. . . . Where, then,
is false opinion? For if all things are either known or
unknown, there can be no opinion which is not compre-
hended under this alternative, and so false opinion is
excluded."
This difficulty may appear at first sight purely verbal,
and we shall perhaps be inclined to see the answer to it
in the double use that we make of the word knowledge.
We use the word in two senses, in one of which it in-
cludes all and everything that is or can be present to
the mind in thinking, and in another and narrower
sense the word knowledge means truth. It was in the
narrow sense of the word that whatever is not true is
not knowledge that Socrates interpreted the meaning
of the Delphic oracle that had declared him the wisest
of men. His wisdom must be, he said, that whereas
other men seemed to be wise and to know something,
he knew that he knew nothing. All men have opinion,
but opinion is not knowledge, though easily and gener-
ally mistaken for it. His perplexity was to understand
what actually this false opinion could be which passed
for knowledge. It could not be nothing at all, for then
it would simply mean ignorance; but in false opinion


76 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
some object is present to the mind. Everything that
the mind thinks of has being. A thing may have being
that does not exist if by existence is meant the particular
existence of an event in time, for most of the things we
think about are timeless—they are ideas, such as white-
ness, goodness, numbers and the properties of numbers,
faith, love, and such-like. All such ideas are called
universals, because their reality does not mean that
they exist at one particular moment and no other, but
they are real, they have being. How, then, can there
be anything intermediate between being and not being,
anything that is and also is not, for this is what false
opinion or error seems to be?
There is, then, a problem of error, and it is quite distinct
from the problem of truth. The problem of truth is to
know by what criterion we can test the agreement of
our ideas with reality; the problem of error is to know
how there can be false opinion. There is false opinion,
of this no one needs to be convinced; but where its place
is in the fundamental scheme of the mental process, in
what precisely it consists, whether it is purely a nega-
tion or.whether it has a positive nature of its own, this
is the problem we have now to consider.
There is an important distinction in logic between
what is contradictory and what is contrary. Of two
contradictory propositions one must be true, the other
must be false; but of two contrary propositions one
must be false, but both may be false. Of contradictory
propositions one is always a pure negation, one declares
the non-existence of what the other affirms the existence;
but of contrary propositions each has a positive content,
and both may be false. A true proposition may be
based on a false opinion, and it is very important to
have a clear idea of what we intend by false opinion.
We do not mean by false opinion such plainly false


THE PROBLEM OF ERROR 77
propositions as that two and two are five or that there
may be no corners in a square—such propositions are
false, because they contradict propositions that are self-
evident. If anyone should seriously affirm them, we
should not, I think, say that such a one had a false
opinion, but that he failed, perhaps through some
illusion, to understand the meaning of the terms he was
using. An example of what would now, I suppose, be
unquestionably regarded by everyone as error is that
whole body of opinion that found expression in the
theory and practice of witchcraft. This was once
almost universally accepted, and though probably at no
period nor in any country was there not some one
who doubted or disbelieved, still the reasons of such
doubt or disbelief would probably be very different
from those reasons which lead us to reject it to-day^
For witchcraft was grounded on a general belief that
spiritual agencies, beneficent and malign, were the cause
of material well-being or evil. This conception has now
given place to the mechanistic or naturalistic theory on
which our modern physical science is based. We inter-
pret all physical occurrences as caused by material
agency. But this belief, quite as much as the belief in
spiritual agencies, is opinion, not knowledge, and it may
be false. It is conceivable that future generations will
reject our scientific notions, self-evident though they
seem to us, as completely as we reject the notions of
the dark ages. It is even conceivable that the whole
of our modern science may come to appear to mankind
as not even an approximation to knowledge. Error,
like illusion, may be universal. No one whose opinion
counts as a rational belief now holds that sickness may-
be caused by the malign influence of the evil eye, and
that this influence may be neutralised by making the
sign of the cross; some, but very few, believe that a


78 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
sick man may be healed by the prayers and anointing
of righteous men; many believe that material disease,
however malignant, may be expelled from the body by
faith; while the majority of rational men, whatever
independent religious views they hold, regard sickness
and disease as material in the ordinary sense, and
expect them to yield to drugs and treatment. Now, of
these various opinions some must be false, while all
may be false. Let us add some illustrations from
philosophy. Some philosophers hold, in common with
general opinion, that sense experience is caused by
physical objects; others hold that there are no physical
objects, but that consciousness is the one and only
reality; and there are others who think that the
reality that gives rise to our sense experience is neither
physical in the sense of a material thing, nor mental
in the sense of consciousness or thought, but is move-
ment or change—change that requires no support and
is absolute. All these are opinions, and may be false,
and our belief that any one of them is true does not
depend on immediate experience, but on reasons. The
best that can be said in favour of any belief is that
there is no reason for supposing it false, and the worst
that can be said against any belief is that there is no
reason for supposing it true. Our problem, then, is to
know what constitutes the nature of error in any one
of these examples if it is, as each one may be, false?
The instances we have given are all of them proposi-
tions or judgments, or else conceptions formed out of
propositions or judgments, the purpose of which is to
interpret experience. The actual experience itself, in
so far as it consists of the actual presence of the object
to the mind aware of it, is, as we have seen, neither
truth nor error; it simply is what it is. It is the con-
ceptions by which we interpret this experience that are


THE PROBLEM OF ERROR 79
true or false. And our problem is that the meaning or
content of a conception, that which is present to the
mind when we make a judgment, is precisely the same
whether the conception is true or false, there is no
distinctive mark or feature by which we can know that
in the one case the object of thought is a real or actual
fact, in the other an opinion to which no reality corre-
sponds. And, further, it seems exceedingly difficult to
understand in what way a non-reality can be present
to the mind at all.
Let us now examine some attempts to solve this
problem, and first of all let us take the pragmatist
solution. Pragmatism claims that it has no difficulty
in explaining error, because, as we have already seen,
it acknowledges no other test or criterion of truth except
a pragmatic one. Every proposition or judgment that
we make must, in order to have any meaning whatever,
be relevant to some human purpose; every such pro-
position is a truth-claim; and every truth-claim is
tested by its workability. Consequently, error is simply
the failure of a proposition to establish its claim by the
practical test of working. Propositions marked by such
failure are errors. As there is no truth independent of
time, place, and circumstance, no irrelevant truth, no
truth independent of the conditions under which its
claim is put forward, there is no truth that may not
become error. No judgment, according to pragmatism,
is an error pure and simple—that is to say, it cannot
come into existence as error, for it comes claiming
truth, and maintaining that claim until challenged; it
becomes an error in retrospect only, and always in re-
lation to another judgment which corrects it. Error
does not characterise a class of judgments; it is something
that happens to a judgment, it is a judgment whose
truth-claim is rejected in reference to another judgment


80 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
which succeeds. The essential thing in the pragmatist
doctrine of error is that in claiming to be true a judg-
ment is not challenging comparison with some inde-
pendent reality, nor is it claiming to belong to a timeless
order of existence—to be eternal; it is claiming to fulfil
the particular purpose for which it has been called
forth, whether that purpose be practical or theoretical.
Let us now consider the explanation of error offered
by the idealist philosophy. In this view only the whole
truth is wholly true; the Absolute, as a perfect, concrete,
individual system, is the ideal, and all that falls short of
it can only possess a degree of truth—a degree which
is greater or less according as it approximates to the ideal.
The degrees of truth are not quantitative, not a mixture
of truth and error, but a nearer or more distant approach
to the ideal. There can be no absolute error, because
if truth is the whole, error, if it exists at all, must in
some way be included in truth. Clearly error cannot
as such be truth, and therefore it must follow that, in
the whole, error loses its character of error, and finds
reconciliation of its contradiction to truth. Error,
then, if it is something, and not a pure negation, is partial
or incomplete truth; the perplexity and contradiction
that it gives rise to are incidental to our partial view.
Knowledge, it must seem to us, can exist only for
omniscience. Unless we know everything, we ki.ow
nothing.
These two doctrines are in a sense the exact antithesis
of one another. They agree together in this, that
in each the explanation of error follows as a conse-
quence of the conception of the nature of truth. The
pragmatist theory implies that there is no truth in any
real sense, but only more or less successful error. The
idealist theory implies that there is no real error, but only
a variety in the degree of truth.


THE PROBLEM OF ERROR 81
i Most people, however, are convinced that truth and
error are not related to one another, nor to the circum-
stances that call forth belief or disbelief. Let us now
•examine a theory that recognises this. There are false
judgments, and they need explanation; error has a
nature of its own. If a judgment is false, it is absolutely
and unalterably false; if it is true, it is unconditionally
true and with no reserve. No logical process, no psycho-
logical disposition, can make what is false true. Error
must lie in the nature of knowledge, and to discover that
nature we must understand the theory of knowledge
and determine the exact nature of the mental act in
knowing. The first essential is to distinguish the kind
of knowledge to whioh truth and error can apply. We
pointed out in the second chapter that all knowledge
rests ultimately on immediate experience. In immediate
experience the relation between the mental act of knowing
and the object that is known is so simple that any ques-
tion as to truth or error in regard to it is unmeaning.
To question the truth of immediate experience is to
question its existence; it is to ask if it is what it is, and
this is plainly unmeaning. But thinking, we said, is
questioning experience in order to know its content or
meaning, and in thinking, the simplicity of the relation
which unites the mind to its object in immediate ex-
perience is left behind, and a logical process of very
great complexity takes its place. It is in this complexity
that the possibility of error lies.
Let us look at it a little more closely. Knowing is
a relation which unites two things, one the mind that
knows, the other the thing known. In every act of
knowing, something is present to the mind; if knowing
is simply awareness of this actually present something,
we call it immediate experience, we are acquainted with
the object. But our knowledge is not only of objects


82 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
immediately present to the mind and with which we
are therefore acquainted. Knowledge embraces the
past and future and the distant realms of space. Indeed
were knowledge only of what is actually present to the
mind, it is diffioult to imagine that we could, in the
ordinary meaning of the word, know anything at all.
I may be thinking, for example, of an absent friend; all
that is present to my mind is, it may be, a memory
image, a faint recall of his appearance on some one
occasion, or perhaps a recollection of the tone of his
voice, or it may be the black marks on white paper
which I recognise as his handwriting. This image is
present to my mind, but the image is not the object,
my friend, about whom I think and make endless judg-
ments, true and false. So also, if what is present to
the mind is affecting me through the external senses,
if it is a sense impression, it is clear that what is actually
present is not the whole object of which I am aware,
but only a very small part of it, or, it may be, no part
of it at all, but something, a sound, or an odour, that
represents it. The immediate data of consciousness are
named by some philosophers sense data, by others,
presentations, by others images, and there is much
controversy as to their nature and existence, but with
this controversy we are not here concerned—we are
seeking to make clear an obvious distinction, namely,
the distinction between knowledge by acquaintance and
knowledge by description.
What kind of knowledge is it that we acquire by
description? Knowledge about things with which we
are not first acquainted. The most important know-
ledge that we possess or acquire is knowledge of objects
which we know only by the knowledge we have about
them—objects that we know about without knowing
them. They are not direct impressions on our senses,


THE PROBLEM OF ERROR 83
nor are they ideas known in actual experience. We
make judgments about them, and the subjects about
which we make these judgments are really composed
of these judgments that we make about them. To go
back to our illustrations, we may know a great deal
about the evil eye, a malignant influence, disease, faith,
healing, causality, physical objects, without any ac-
quaintance with them, without even knowing that they
exist. Such knowledge is descriptive, and the objects
are descriptions. Knowledge by description is never
quite simple, and is often very complex, for, besides the
relation of the mental act to the object known, there
are the terms and relations which are the elements
in the judgment and the relations of the judgments
themselves. If we analyse a judgment, every word
in which it is expressed, whether it is a noun or a
verb or a preposition or a conjunction, conveys a
distinct meaning, indicates a term or a relation, each of
which can be made a distinct object to the mind, and all
of which are combined in the single meaning the judg-
ment expresses. It is in this complexity that the possi-
bility of error lies, and the possibility increases as the
complexity increases. All the terms and the relations
which a judgment contains depend on the knowledge
we have by acquaintances—that is to say, we are ulti-
mately dependent on our actual experience for all
knowledge whatever, whether it is acquaintance or
description, for we can only describe in terms with which
we are acquainted; but in the judgment these elements
are combined into new objects, or a certain relation is
declared to exist between objects, and it is this com-
bination of the elements of the judgment that involves
its truth or falsehood.
If this view of the nature of the mental act of knowing
is accepted, we are able to understand how false opinion


84 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
is consistent with the fact that all knowledge is truth.
We escape both the alternatives that seemed to Socrates
the only possible ones. "When a man has a false
opinion, does he think that which he knows to be some
other thing which he knows, and knowing both is he at the
same time ignorant of both? Or does he think of some-
thing which he does not know as some other thing which
he does not know?" No, neither; in error he thinks
that something that he knows is in a relation that he
knows to some other thing that he knows, when in fact
that relation is not relating the two things. The false
proposition is not one in which the constituent terms
and relations are unknown or non-existent, but one in
which a combination of these terms and relations is
thought to exist when in fact it does not exist; and the
true proposition is that in which the combination
thought to exist does exist. We can, therefore, if this
account be true, at least know what false opinion or
error can be, whether or not we have any means of
deciding in regard to any particular opinion that it is
false.
There is one other theory, the last we shall notice.
It is in one respect the most important of all, namely,
that it is the most direct attempt to grapple with the
problem of error. It is founded on a theory of know-
ledge which we owe mainly to the profound and acute
work of a German philosopher (Meinong), and which
at the present time is being keenly discussed. It is an
attempt to determine more exactly than has yet been
done the fundamental scheme of the mental life and
development. The brief account that I am now offering,
I owe to a paper by Prof. G. F. Stout on " Some Funda-
mental Points in the Theory of Knowledge." We have
seen that the problem of error is the difficulty there is
in conceiving how there can be any real thing, any real


THE PROBLEM OF ERROR 85
object of thought, intermediate between being and not-
being. Error seems to exist and yet to have a nature
which is a negation of existence, and it seems therefore
to be a downright contradiction when we affirm that
error or false opinion can be—that there is a real object
of thought when we judge falsely. This theory meets
the difficulty directly by distinguishing in the mental
act of knowing a process that is neither perceiving nor
thinking of things, and that involves neither believing
nor disbelieving on the one hand nor desiring or willing
on the other: this is the process of supposing. Cor-
responding to this mental act of supposing, there is a
distinct kind of object intended or meant by the mind
—an object that is neither a sense datum nor an idea,
nor a judgment, but a supposition. Also and again
corresponding to this mental act of supposing and its
intended object the supposition, there is a mode of
being which is neither existence nor non-existence, but
is named subsistence. A supposition, it is said, does not
exist—it subsists. This thesis, it will easily be under-
stood, is based on an analysis, and deals with arguments
that touch the most fundamental problems of theory
of knowledge. Moreover, its presentment is excessively
technical, and only those highly trained in the habit of
psychological introspection and skilled in philosophical
analysis are really competent to discuss it. It is not
possible to offer here anything but a simple outline of
the part of the theory that concerns the present problem.
The actual experience of knowing is a relation between
two things, one of which is a mental act, the act of per-
ceiving or thinking or having ideas, and the other is
an object, that which is perceived or thought of. The
act is a particular mental existence, it is the act of a
psychical individual. The object is not included within
the actual experience which is the knowing of it, it is


86 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
that which is meant or intended by the experience.
The act, then, is the mental process of meaning or in-
tending, the object the thing meant or intended. The
mental act differs according to the kind of object in-
tended. The act of perceiving is the direction of the
mind towards sense data and ideas; the act of judging
is the direction of the mind towards judgments or
propositions about things, propositions that affirm or
deny relations between things; the act of supposing
is different from both these—it is the direction of the
mind towards suppositions. Suppositions differ from
ideas in this, that they may be either positive or nega-
tive, whereas ideas are never negative. This may seem
to contradict experience. Can we not, for example,
have an idea of not-red just as well as an idea of red?
No, the two ideas can easily be seen to be one and the
same; in each case it is red we are actually acquainted
with, and the difference is in affirming or denying
existence to the one idea. The difference is in our
judgment, which may be affirmative or negative. A
supposition is like a judgment in this respect; it may be
either affirmative or negative, but it differs from a judg-
ment in another respect, that while a judgment always
conveys a oonviction, always expresses belief or dis-
belief, a supposition does not—it is neither believed nor
disbelieved.
Before I show the application of this analysis of
knowledge to the problem of error, let me try and clear
up its obscurity, for undoubtedly it is difficult to com-
prehend. Its difficulty lies in this, that though all the
ideas with which it deals are quite familiar—supposi-
tions, real and unreal possibilities, fulfilled and non-
fulfilled beliefs—yet it seems to run counter to all our
notions of the extreme simplicity of the appeal to reality.
It seems strange and paradoxical to our ordinary habit


THE PROBLEM OF ERROR 87
of thinking to affirm that there are real things and real
relations between things which though real yet do not
exist, and also that non-existent realities are not things
that once were real but now are nought—they are things
that subsist. Yet this is no new doctrine. The most
familiar case of such realities is that of numbers. The
Greeks discovered that numbers do not exist—that is to
say, that their reality is of another kind to that which
we denote by existence. Numbers are realities, other-
wise there would be no science of mathematics. Pytha-
goras (about 540-500 b.c.) taught that numbers are the
reality from which all else is derived. And there are
many other things of the mind that seem indeed to be
more real than the things of sense. It is this very
problem of error that brings into relief this most im-
portant doctrine.
Now let us apply this theory of the supposition to the
problem of error, and we shall then see how there can
be an object present to the mind when we judge falsely,
and also that the object is the same whether we judge
truly or falsely. Suppositions are real possibilities;
they are alternatives that may be fulfilled or that may
never be fulfilled. These real possibilities, or these
possible alternatives, are objects of thought; they do
not belong to the mental act of thinking; they are not
in the mind, but realities present to the mind. In mere
supposing they are present as alternatives; in judging,
we affirm of them or deny of them the relation to general
reality that they are fulfilled. Judgments therefore
are true or false accordingly as the fulfilment they affirm
does or does not agree with reality. In this way, then,
we may answer the perplexing question, How can there
be an object of thought in a false judgment? The
answer is, that the objects of thought about which we
make judgments are suppositions, and our judgments


88 THE PROBLEM OF TRUTH
concern their fulfilment, and their fulfilment is a relation
external to them—it is their agreement or disagreement
with reality.
CHAPTER IX
CONCLUSION
I will now briefly sum up the argument of this book.
The problem of truth is to discover the nature of the
agreement between the things of the mind, our ideas,
and the reality of which ideas are the knowledge. We
call the agreement truth. What is it? We have seen
that there are three different answers, namely—(1) That
it is a correspondence between the idea and the reality;
(2) That it is the coherence of the idea in a consistent
and harmonious whole; and (3) That it is a value that
we ourselves give to our ideas.
The theory that truth is correspondence we found to
offer this difficulty. To say of an idea that it corre-
sponds with reality supposes a knowledge of reality in
addition to and distinct from the knowledge that is the
idea, and yet the knowledge of reality is the idea of it.
And if it be said that not the idea but the judgment
is what corresponds with reality in truth, this equally
supposes a knowledge of reality that is not a judgment.
If, as the common sense of mankind requires us to
believe, the reality that is known by us exists in entire
independence of our relation of knowing to it, how can
we state this fact without falling into contradiction in
the very statement of it? This is the difficulty of a
realist theory of knowledge.
We next examined the theory that truth is coherence,
and this seemed to present to us an unattainable ideal.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Thecetetus of Plato is an exposition of the problem
of truth and error as it presented itself in ancient philo-
sophy. The quotation I have made from it, and also
the quotations from the Republic, are from Jowett's
translation.
The most clear exposition of what I have called the
realistic doctrine is The Problems of Philosophy, by the
Hon. Bertrand Russell, in the Home University Library
(Williams and Norgate). I have adopted Mr. Russell's
terms, "acquaintance " and "description "; the distinc-
tion they denote seems to me of fundamental importance,
and Mr. Russell's doctrine on this point a permanent
addition to philosophy. Mr. Russell's theory, that in
the judgment what is present to the mind is a rela-
tion which is external to the terms of the judgment,
and that agreement or disagreement between this rela-
tion and reality makes the truth or falsehood of the
judgment, can only be appreciated if studied in con-
nection with his general scheme.
The classical work on what I have called the modern
idealist doctrine (I have avoided the word intellectualist)
is Mr. F. H. Bradley's Appearance and Reality. I have
attempted to give the main lines of the theory in my
chapter on " The Absolute." Although it is a book for
advanced students, it is not a closed volume even to
the uninstructed. The brilliant dialectical skill of the
91


92 BIBLIOGRAPHY
author is acknowledged and may be enjoyed by those
who reject or may fail to understand his conclusion.
Mr. Harold H. Joachim's The Nature of Truth (Oxford,
Clarendon Press) is a most able and scholarly argument
for the coherence theory of truth.
The principal expositions of Pragmatism are the
works of William James and of Dr. F. C. S. Schiller.
William James' The Will to Believe was the first distinct
formulation of the principle. Pragmatism, a New Name
for some Old Ways of Thinking, is the fullest and most
systematic statement of the doctrine. The Meaning
of Truth is a defence of the doctrine against the criticism
that had been meted out to it unsparingly. All three
books are published by Longmans.
Dr. F. C. S. Schiller is uncompromising in his advocacy
of a complete return to the doctrine taught in the ancient
world by Protagoras. He has defended that philosopher
against the arguments of Plato in a polemical pamphlet
entitled Plato or Protagoras? (Oxford, Blackwell). An
Essay on "Axioms as Postulates " in Personal Idealism
(Macmillan & Co.), and two volumes of collected essays
on Humanism (Macmillan & Co.), set forth the doctrine,
which he prefers to call Humanism, with great force,
abundant illustration, and the relief of no small amount
of humour.
For an account of the theories of Bergson, I may
mention my own little book in this series, Henri Bergson:
The Philosophy of Change. M. Bergson's books are Time
and Freewill, Matter and Memory, and Creative Evolution.
To these has been recently added An Introduction to
Metaphysics (Macmillan, 1912). It is the republication
in English of an article written in 1903, which has been
for a long time out of print. It is a short and clear
statement of the doctrine of Intuition.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 93
The important studies of Professor G. F. Stout are
not easily accessible to the general reader, as they consist
in contributions to philosophical journals and proceed-
ings of learned societies. The essay referred to in the
last chapter, " Some Fundamental Points in the Theory
of Knowledge," is in the St. Andrews Quincentenary
Publications, 1911 (Maclehose). I may mention also
his essay on "Error" in Personal Idealism, noticed
above, and " The Object of Thought and Real Being,"
in Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 1911.


INDEX
Bebgson, Hons. Henri, 63, 69,
73,89
Berkeley, 20, 32, 73
Cohebbnce Theory, 25, 27
Correspondence Theory, 24, 27
Discoveby of Planet Neptune,
59
Faith-attitude of Pragma-
tism, 55
Formal Logic, 10
Hegel, 44
Hume, 30
INTELLECTUALISM, 44
James, William, 44
Kant, 26, 27, 42, 73
Meinong, 84
Piebce, C. S., 44
Plato, 11, 44, 67, 68, 74
Pluralistic Realism, 24
Poincare', Henri, 54
Pragmatist Theory of Truth,
65
Primary Qualities, 32
Protagoras, His book The Truth,
10, 11 ; His maxim, 44
Pythagoras, 87
Relativity, Principle of, 48,
53,62
Republic of Plato, 67
S. ANSELM's Argument, 29, 31,
41
Schiller, Dr. F. C. S., 44
Self, The Idea of, 36 _
Socrates, 11, 74
Space and Time, 33, 34, 36
Stout, Prof. G. F., 84
Theatetus of Plato, 11, 74
Unknowable, The, 29, 37
Zbno, 34
Printed by Ballaktyne, Hanson ,5h Co.
Edinburgh £h London
4/13
'5


THE PEOPLE'S BOOKS
THE FIRST HUNDRED VOLUMES
The volumes issued (Spring 1913) are marked with an asterisk
SCIENCE
»i. The Foundations of Science . . By W. C. D. Whetham, F.R.S.
•a. Embryology—The Beginnings of Life By Prof. Gerald Leighton, M.D.
3. Biology—The Science of Life . . By Prof. W. D. Henderson. M.A.
% Zoology: The Study of Animal Life By Prof. E. W. MacBride, F.R.S.
•5. Botany; The Modern Study of Plants By M. C. Stopes, D.Sc., Ph.D.
6. Bacteriology By W. E. Carnegie Dickson, M.D.
•7. The Structure of the Earth . . By the Rev. T. G. Bonney, F.R.S.
•i. Evolution By E. S. Goodrich, M.A., F.R.S.
9. Darwin . ..... By Prof. W. Garstang, M.A., D.Sc.
* 10. Heredity By J. A. S. Watson, B.Sc.
*ir. Inorganic Chemistry .... By Prof. E. C. C. Baly, F.R.S.
,2. Organic Chemistry .... By Prof. J. B. Cohen, B.Sc, F.R.S.
13. The Principles of Electricity . . By Norman R. Campbell, M.A.
14. Radiation . By P. Phillips, D.Sc
•15. The Science of the Stars . . . By E. W. Maunder, F.R.A.S.
6. The Science of Light . . . . By P. Phillips, D.Sc.
.,. Weather-Science By R. G. K. Lempfert, M A.
0 Hypnotism By Alice Hutchison, M.D.
_*ne Baby: A Mother's Book . . By a University Woman.
Youth and Sex—Dangers and Safe-/ IiyMaryScharlieb, M.D., M.S.,and
guards for Boys and Girls . . \ G. E. C. Pritchard, M.A., M.D.
.. Motherhood-A Wife's Handbook . By H. S. Davidson, F.R.CS.E.
a. Lord Kelvin By A. Russell, M.A., D.Sc
,. Huxley By Professor G. Leighton, M.D.
Sir W. Huggins and Spectroscopic / By E.W. Maunder, F.R.A.S.,of the
Astronomy \ Royal Observatory, Greenwich.
Practical Astronomy .... By H. Macpherson, Jr., F.R.A.S.
Aviation {B» *$%*. F- "altar, R.N.,
Navigation By W.'Hail, R.N., B.A.
Pond Life By E. C. Ash, M.R.A.C.
Dietetics By Alex. Bryce, M.D., D.P.H.
The Nature of Mathematics . . By P. G. B. Jourdain, M.A.
Applications of Electricity . . . By Alex. Ogilvie, B.Sc.
gardening By A. Cecil Bartlett
The Care of the Teeth . . . By J. A. Young, L.D.S.
Ulas of the World . . . . By J. Bartholomew, F.R.G.S.
,ritish Birds By F. B. Kirkman, B.A.
PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION
ie Meaning of Philosophy . . By Prof. A.E.Taylor,M.A.,F.B.A.
enri Bergson By H. Wildon Carr.
.--sychology By H. J. Watt, M.A., Ph.D.
,ithics ByCanonRasbdall, D.Litt., F.B.A.
.y. Kant's Philosophy By A. D. Lindsay, M.A.
30. The Teaching of Plato . . . By A. D. Lindsay, M.A.
•67. Aristotle By Prof. A. E.Taylor,M.A., F.B.A.
63. Nietzsche By M. A. MOgge, Ph.D.
60. Eucken By A. J. Jones, M.A., B.Sc, Ph.D.
7°' TheBelutyrin,enta! P*ych°Io(ry of.}ByC.W. Valentine, B. A.
• 7r. The Problem of Truth' .' '. '. By H. Wildon Carr.
59. George^ Berkeley: the Philosophy j. By G. Dawes HickS( Litt-D.
3r. Buddhism . .' .' .' .' .' By Prof.T.W. Rhys Davids, F.E. A.
•32. Roman Catholicism . . By H. B. Coxon.
•33. The Oxford Movement . . . By Wilfrid P. Ward.
j4. The Bible In the Light of the Higher/ By Rev. W. F. Adeney, M.A., and
Criticism \ Rev. Prof. W. H.Bennett,Litt.D.
35. Cardinal Newman By Wilfrid Meynell.
•72. The Church of England . . . By Rev. Canon Masterman.


PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION-(w/„;,*r)
73. Anglo-Catholicism . . . . By A. E. Manning Foster.
•74. The Free Churches .... By Rev. Edward Shillito, M.A.
•75. Judaism By Ephraim Levine, B.A.
•76. Theosopliy By Annie Besanl.
HISTORY
•3S. The Growth of Freedom . . . By H. W. Nevinson.
37. Bismarck By Prof. F. M. Powicke, M.A.
•38. Oliver Cromwell By Hilda Johnstone, M.A.
* jo. Mary Queen of Scots .... By E. O'Neill, M.A.
*4o. Cecil Rhodes Ry Ian Colvin.
*4i. Julius Caesar By Hilary Hardinge.
History of England—
42. England in the Making; . . . By Prof. F. J. C. Hearnshaw, IX. D.
-43. England in the Middle Ages . By E. O'Neill, M.A.
44. The Monarchy and the People . . By W. T. Waugh, M.A.
45. The Industrial Revolution . . . By A. Jones, M.A.
By.G. S. Veltch, M.A.
Hy L. G. Redmond Howard.
By H. W. Wilson.
Ry Major G. W. Redway.
By E. Fearenside, B.A.
lor. Luther and the Reformation . . Hy L. D. Agate, M.A.
102. The Discovery of the New World . By F. B. Kirkman, B.A.
• 103. Turkey and the Eastern Question . By John Macdonald.
104. A History of Architecture . . .By Mrs. Arthur Bell.
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
•47. Women's Suffrage . . . . By M. G. Fawcett, LL.D. - .
* Th%rG°ov^menthtoBday * ^^V ™ R»»y Muir, M.A.
49. An Introduction to Economic Science By Prof. H. O. Meredith. M.A.
50. Socialism By F. B. Kirkman, B.Af*
46. Empire and Democracy
*6i. Home Rule . . .
77. Nelson ....
•76. Wellington and Waterloo
100. A History of Greece
'79. Mediaeval Socialism
•So. Syndicalism
81. Labour and Wages
•82. Co-operation
By Rev. B. Jarrett, OP., M.A.
By J. H. Harley, M.A.
~>H. M.Hall
By H. M. Hallsworth, M.A., B.Sc.
By Joseph Clayton.
•83. Insurance as Investment . . . By W. A. Robertson, F.F. A.
•92. The Training of the Child . . . By G. Spiller.
•105. Trade Unions By Joseph Clayton.
•106. Everyday Law By J. J. Adams.
LETTERS
•51. Shakespeare By Prof. C. H. Herford, Litt.D.
•52. Wordsworth By Rosaline Masson.
♦53. Pure Gold—A Choice of Lyrics aml \ bv H. C. O'Neill.
Sonnets . . . . . . /
•54. Francis Bacon By Prof. A. R. Skemp, M.A.
*S5. The Brontes By Flora Masson.
•56. Carlyle By the Rev. L MacLean Watt.
*57. Dante By A. G. Ferrers Howell.
58. Ruskin By A. Blyth Webster, M.A.
59. Common Faults in Writing English By Prof. A. R. Skemp, M.A.
*6o. A Dictionary of Synonyms . .By Austin K. Gray, B.A.
84. Classical Dictionary . . . . By A. E. Stirling.
•85. History of English Literature . . By A. Compton-Rickett.
86. Browning By Prof. A. R. Skemp, M.A.
*o7. Charles Lamb By Flora Masson.
88. Goethe By Prof. C. H. Herford, Liu. D
89. Balzac By Frank Harris.
90. Ronssean By H. Sacher.
91. Ibsen By Hilary Hardinge.
•93. Tennyson By Aaron Watson.
107. R. L. Stevenson By Rosaline Masson.
•108. Shelley P,y Sydney Waterlow, M.A.
109. William Morris By A. Blyth Webster, M.A.
LONDON AND EDINBURGH: T. C. & E. C. JACK
NEW YORK: DODGE PUBLISHING CO.
