












17/
Discourse on Truth.

RICHARD SHUTE, M.A.,
SENIOR STUDENT AND TUTOR OF CHRIST CHURCH, OXFORD.
Henry S. King & Co., London.
1877.


[The rights of Translation and Reproduction arc reset ved.]


CONTENTS.
—.—
CHAPTER I.
Preliminary.
The Problem before us—Words which require no verbal explanation—Truth
not one of these—Definitions of Truth by the Philosophers—Attempt at a
more exhaustive analysis—Apologetic.
CHAPTER II.
On Definition.
Words with which Definition is concerned—Definition by means of Simple
Ideas—Sensations of Sight the first, most frequent, and most lasting—The
Ideas of Sight are therefore the most convenient for definition—Defini-
tions of Individuals, Natural Kinds, and Artificial Classes.
CHAPTER III.
Of True Propositions.
The object of Proposition—Negative use of Universal Propositions—The ab-
horrence of Doubt and consequent arbitrary value put upon propositions—
Contradictory Instance—Absolute vagueness of Particular Propositions-
Propositions as to Artificial Kinds.
CHAPTER IV.
Of Cause and the Law of Universal Causation.
Two distinct questions—Cause an arbitrary link between phenomena—Attri-
bution and Causation—The prinueval Savage—The supposed Law of the
Uniformity of Nature—The Future and The Past—Theological Difficulty
—Hume's theory—The Idea of Cause—Animistic Nature thereof.


iv
Contents.
CHAPTER V.
Of Induction.
Artificial Causes—Experiment—Symbolic Proof—Counteracting Causes—
Recondite Attributes preferred—Instance of Induction.
CHAPTER VI.
Of Syllogism and Deductive Reasoning.
Natural and Artificial Propositions—Valuable Deductions chiefly those with
many terms—Mr. Mill's theory—Note-book or Account-book ?—Locke's
criticism—True form of Syllogism.
CHAPTER VII.
Of the Matter of Thought.
Thought chiefly of words—The Picture-thought of the Savage—Symbolic
Thought—Its loss and gain—Objections of Philosophy and of Common
Sense—Imagination and Poetry—Utopian.
CHAPTER VIII.
Of Necessary Truths.
Truths Logical, Mathematical, and Metaphysical—The Three Logical Laws—
In no sense Laws of Thought—The Nature of Number—The higher
Numbers meaningless—In what sense are Laws of Number necessary?
CHAPTER IX.
Epilogue.
True import of Treatise—Historical standpoint—Relation to Theology—A
bold Metaphor.


A Discourse on Truth
CHAPTER I.
PRELIMINARY.
All those serene philosophers, who from age to age
have ascended above the mists of earth into the pure
aether of speculation, have ever been at pains to inform
us that the aim of their pursuit was the Truth. This it
is that they profess to discover to mankind, whether
they offer it to them in its simple form, or in that more
refined quintessence, which they are wont to call Truth
absolute or Truth for all intelligence. As the results
which they respectively bring down to us seem, at least
to the eye of the uninitiated, to differ greatly both in
colour and form, a simple man might reasonably ask
whether the thing which all seek is precisely the
same, and might desire some explanation of the object
of their search. 'Tell me,' he might say, 'what is
that which you expect to find, and how you will know it
when you have hit upon it.' He might ask with Pilate,
'What is truth r'


2
A Discourse on Truth.
To this question, which we might naturally think
would be settled at the very starting-point of the
journey, very few of those great metaphysicians, who
profess to have arrived at the goal, deign to give any
answer. Doubtless they would say that any man who
was so unlearned as to miss the meaning of so plain
and usual a word, was all-unworthy of their august
attention; while he, who, understanding it, was so un-
candid as to raise difficulties and questionings at the
very outset of their undertaking, deserved nought but
scorn for his frivolous sophistry.
If a man were to press them further and say unto
them, 'O great teachers, I confess me simple and un-
learned, but I earnestly seek after knowledge, nor do I
think I am altogether without understanding, yet can I
not resolve this question; I pray you, therefore, set
forth in some short form of words, what you mean by
Truth,' they would probably urge, that, as all words
must be explained by other words, there must be at
least a certain number whose meaning is assumed to be
understood by all men; for, unless that be so, we should
ever explain the unknown by the equally unknown, and
thus ceaselessly wander in the darkness; that Truth,
then, is one of those ultimate words which are them-
selves better understood by mankind than any other
words that could be used to explain them, and that he
who will not or cannot understand, must be content for


The Initial Question.
ever to sit down in ignorance. That the first part of
this argument is irrefragable, no sober man will deny;
but, in its application to the word before us, I humbly
hope to show that these great men are mistaken.
What, then, are those words which are most suitably
left unexplained? Assuredly those as to whose mean-
ing men can arrive at agreement by some other method
than that of words. What this method is, and what are
the words to which it is applicable, will be sufficiently
obvious from a few instances. If any man knows not
what I mean by the words dog or tree, my surest means
of informing him is to point to the one or the other
object, and no verbal explanation will give him a clearer
idea of my meaning, though doubtless a scientific defi-
nition may convey a more carefully limited notion. If, on
the other hand he asks me ' What is Justice?' it is ob-
vious that I cannot follow the same easy method which I
before employed; I must now betake me to words, and
say, 'Justice is the giving back to every man the exact
equivalent of his own deeds,' hoping that every word
in this sentence will be better understood than the one
word to be explained; a hope in which I am often
deceived.
We have thus far got to this point, that all the names
of natural objects may be safely left unexplained, and
may serve as the starting-points for definitions, but it
requires little thought to see that these by themselves
-
B 2


4
A Discourse on Truth.
will not be sufficient to form the foundation of all our
intercourse with each other. We have fortunately
several other classes of words whose meaning we may
make clear by the same or a similar process. We may
make clear the meanings of such words as Like and
Unlike, Near and Distant, by means of pairs of objects
varying in those points presented to direct observation.
Again, we may show the meaning of any word denoting
action by performing that action; and here I think we
come to the end of our directly explainable words. But
it is clear that all these will not take us far enough, for
we have as yet got no words explanatory of our inward
feelings—our joys and griefs, our hopes and fears. Un-
less we can be certain that we mean the same thing
when we use terms expressing these, full half our speech
in bulk, and that by far the most valuable half, remains
yet without firm ground whereon to rest its feet. Here,
then, we might seem to be brought to a standstill, for it
is manifest that we cannot directly employ our former
method; we cannot put a finger on one emotion and
say, 'This is Love,' and forthwith touch another and
say, 'Behold, here is Hatred.'
Happily even here Nature leaveth us "not in doubt.
She hath so ordered that the simpler emotions, such as
Pain and Pleasure, should—unless when suppressed of
intent—reflect their presence on the countenance and
gestures, and betoken their presence by such signs as


Names which may be left unexplained.
5
are roughly the same in all men, and, to some extent, in
all animals. The external signs, it is true, give no direct
knowledge of the thing signified, since they in no way
resemble it—a smile is not like joy, nor can be com-
pared with it—but they refer us back to ourselves and
bid us reflect what were our feelings when we exhibited
similar signs; we can then have but little doubt that
our neighbour's feeling now resembles ours of yesterday.
In the same way, if I wish to explain to any one without
the use of words what pleasure or pain is, I may either
point to a man at present under the influence of one or
the other of these emotions, or I may counterfeit them
as well as I can in my own face. By either method I
may feel pretty sure of making my meaning understood.
How many of the internal changes of the soul can
thus be explained by external gesture is a question to
which it is not easy to return a certain answer. It
must be referred for solution to the men of science, who
shall tell us to what extent the variations of the face
are indissolubly connected with changes of the soul.
This at least we may safely say, that beyond the first and
most simple feelings, the changes of the face are so
delicate and hard to seize that they offer no sufficiently
secure means of interpreting shades or varieties of feel-
ing. For the more complex emotions we have to em-
ploy a mixed process. We combine our names of the
simple feelings, which we can have no doubt our hearers


6
A Discourse on Truth.
understand, with other names of qualities or relations
which properly belong to external experience, and which
are explainable by immediate reference to the senses,
as ' Great,'' Small,' 'Bitter,' 'Sweet,' etc. By these com-
binations we are able to convey some kind of notion of
all our more delicate internal operations and affections,
though whether that notion be accurate we may greatly
doubt. In many cases we are constantly kept aware of
the fact, that the expression used is a mere metaphor,
as, for instance, when we talk of black Care; but the ex-
pression heavy affliction is no whit less metaphorical,
since the word heavy has only a real definite meaning
when referred to tangible objects. In sooth, the neces-
sity under which we lie of explaining by far the larger
part of the internal world by means of expressions
which properly apply only to the external, involves all
our talk on moral and emotional themes in a mistiness
from which the clearest thinkers cannot entirely free
themselves.
We find, then, that all those words which can be
fully explained without use of other words, and which
are thus fitted to form the elements or material of
language, fall under three heads; we have first, names
of external objects with their qualities and obvious
relations, such as greatness, littleness, etc.; second,
those of actions; and third, those of some few simple
emotions. All other words must, I affirm, be explained


Truth is not one of these Names.
7
by means of these; and every clear definition or expla-
nation must be at length reducible to these elements.
We have now to ask, Does Truth belong to any of the
three classes Which we have discovered? If it do not,
it seems clear that a definition is required, and that
after all it was the duty of the philosophers to have
given us one. Yet to whom is it not manifest that that
which we all mean by Truth is something utterly
different from any of those things of which we have
treated r It can be neither simple emotion nor action,
and to attempt to identify it with any external, sensible
object, or even with any quality or relation of such
sensible objects, would be an absurdity into which no
sane man would fall. Our philosophers, then, were
dealing disingenuously with us; unless it be that,
having ascended so high to the mountain top, they
had forgotten the difficulties of the first slope, and the
arts by which they themselves overcame them and
mounted up aloft.
I will bring the matter between us to a very simple
issue by a homely illustration. Suppose our philo-
sopher wrecked on some unknown land, inhabited by a
race as far advanced in civilization, and in all intellec-
tual and moral development, as ourselves, but every
word of whose language was unknown to him. Let us
see how he would set about learning their language,
and what words he would understand first. Surely he


8
A Discourse on Truth.
would touch sensible objects as a sign that he wished to
know their names, and would learn them. He would rub
his stomach to signify the pain of hunger, and open
and shut his mouth to show his desire to eat, and would
be taught the names of the feeling and of the action.
Thus he would rapidly enlarge his knowledge of all the
names of the three classes which we have mentioned,
and would soon be fully equipped with all the language
of common life. But how and when would he discourse
to them of Truth, his proper subject? Not, I imagine,
until he was familiar with their methods of combining
that fund of elemental words with which we have sup-
posed him already stocked. Through some such com-
bination, and thus only, could he convey an idea of the
subject of his discourse. This combination of words
would then be the natural explanation or definition of
Truth in that language. That such a natural definition
must exist in all languages, and that without it the
notion of Truth will for ever remain vague, appears to
me so apparent from our foregoing discourse, that I
shall put myself at no further pains to prove it.
Let us seek then for some combination of our elemental
names, which will give us, if it may be, a clear notion
of that which is said to be the final aim of all science,
and all philosophy. But first let us look again whether
among the vast company of the philosophers, there be not
one who has given us that for which we seek. Plato


Definitions of Truth.
9
talks of Truth as the Science of the Ever-existent,
but I fear me the terms of the definition are not in any
way reducible to our three classes, while it is obvious
that it excludes almost the whole of what humbler
mortals consider true. For instance, that Victoria is
Queen of England, is clearly not a statement falling +
within this definition. In sober sadness the master was
thinking, not of that humdrum work-a-day Truth with
which we are at present concerned, but of that airy
spirit of Truth which is pursued and captured only by
philosophers.
I am inclined to think that Aristotle meant simply to
give a definition of Truth in a sentence to which most of
his interpreters assign a much more lofty aim; where
he says, ' He that thinketh of the separate as separate,
and of the conjoint as conjoint, is in truth, but he is in
falsehood whose thoughts are not in accordance with
facts.' This definition, if it be a definition, is obviously
intended to explain that same earthly truth with which
we are concerned, but it seems open to objection, both
for its vagueness and for its narrowness. We cannot
precisely determine what our author intended by the
expressions 'the separate,' and 'the conjoint,' and, al-
though we might be able to enlarge and explain the
sentence in such a way as should render it an adequate
definition of Truth as we conceive it, yet we could only
achieve this at the cost of the commission of the most


io A Discourse on Truth.
serious, although the most common, offence of histo-
rians of philosophy, to wit, the reading into the text of
an author, ideas and forms of thought which are in
reality the product of the mind of the critic. This at
least we may say, that the only Truth here spoken of is
that of thought, which, as I shall hope to show, is not
the only, nor even the most proper sense of the word
which we seek to define.
After Aristotle, we may pass over a host of writers,
ancient and modern, from whom some sort of definition
of Truth may be indirectly abstracted; and a few who
make grotesque attempts at a direct explanation of
the term. Of these latter, perhaps the most simple,
but by no means the most absurd, is the booby who
was the author of that list of definitions which some
cruel editor attributed to Plato, but which certainly has
borrowed more from Aristotle in its form, and nothing
from either in its spirit. 'Truth,' quoth he, 'is a habit
in affirmation and denial; or a knowledge of true
things.' O marvellous discovery!
There remains yet one definition of truth for us to
consider—a definition so infinitely superior in value to
any of its predecessors, that it seems almost presump-
tion to criticize it, one, indeed, from which I differ
rather in matter of form and extraneous adjuncts, than
as to the substance or spirit which underlies it. I mean
that of Locke, one of the greatest because the humblest


Definitions of Truth. 11
of philosophers, who carried the method of Bacon into
the intellectual world with a consistency which Bacon
himself at times fell short of. He, following the order
of nature, and not attempting to prune her to fit systems
or theories, discovered that the notion of Truth was a
complex one, and could only be properly explained
after the examination of all those simpler elements of
thought whose names are capable of a non-verbal
explanation, and which he classifies—although from a
somewhat different point of view—in a fashion which
accords sufficiently well with that which we have
given.
In the fifth chapter of the fourth and most glorious
book of his ' Essay on the Human Understanding,' he
gives us the following passage. "'What is truth ?' was
an enquiry many ages since; and it being that which
all mankind either do or pretend to search after, it
cannot but be worth our while carefully to examine
wherein it consists; and so acquaint ourselves with the
nature of it, as to observe how the mind distinguishes
it from falsehood.
"Truth then seems to me, in the proper import of the
word, to signify nothing but the joining or separating of
signs as the things signified by them do agree or dis-
agree one with another. The joining or separating of
signs here meant, is what by another name we call
'proposition.' So that truth properly belongs only to


12
A Discourse on Truth.
propositions; whereof there are two sorts, viz., mental
and verbal; as there are two sorts of signs commonly
made use of, viz., ideas and words."
This explanation of Truth takes its form from the
main doctrine of Locke, that all our knowledge con-
sisted of a stock of ideas which (at least with regard to
external things) were produced in us by sensation, and
remained in the mind after the sensation was at an end.
These ideas were, as he says, the signs of external
things, but they need not at all necessarily resemble the
thing signified, any more than the names which are the
signs of the ideas resemble the ideas themselves. There
is considerable doubt as to whether he considered the
ideas as modifications of the sentient mind, or as sepa-
rate things existing in it as counters in a bag. It must
be admitted that his language gives great colour to the
latter absurd hypothesis, although great stress must not
be laid upon detached expressions in a writer who inten-
tionally adopted a loose and conversational style. We
must at least admit that the whole theory is open to
grave objections, and the definition of Truth, as he
gives it, must, of course, stand or fall with the main
theory, although I hope to be able to show that the
correct definition differs from this in little more than
form of statement. I may remark, in passing, that the
expressions ' agree' and 'disagree' do not seem appli-
cable, without great straining, to all true propositions.


Insufficiency of all extant Definitions. 13
It must be true to say that 'Some Romans were
cowards,' but the notion of Roman, and that of coward,
obviously do not agree; while of' some Romans,' inde-
pendently of any individual Romans, I have clearly no
idea other than that of Romans in general.*
Since, then, all our questioning of the sages has led
us to no satisfactory result, let us endeavour humbly, by
the light of plain common sense, to arrive at a solution
of this all-important question, following that method by
which alone the meaning of any word can be ascer-
tained; that is, by the comparison of all the various
uses of it in a number of sentences taken at random; if,
haply, we may discover a common factor in all of them.
* Sir William Hamilton says that almost all philosophers concur in denning
Truth as the agreement between thought and its object, and quotes a passage
from Aquinas where this view is expressed. But All the Schoolmen, and All
Philosophers are phrases which do not mean precisely the same thing, though
Sir William Hamilton is at times inclined to identify them. The assertion is
certainly inexact as far as the majority of English philosophers is concerned,
and I believe it is also untrue of the majority of French thinkers of the last
century, though it is hard to speak with certainty as to a point which in most
cases is not definitely raised in their writings (Cf. Hamilton, "Lectures on
Logic,'' Lecture XXVII., vol. ii. p. 61-63, ecl- Mansel and Veitch). Pere
Malebranche, in his treatise, "De la Recherche de la Verite," declares that
Truth consists in the knowledge of pure ideas which the spirit gains when it
retires to commune with itself, putting aside altogether the delusion of
the senses. But this phase of the Cartesian doctrine is really rather
theological than philosophical (Cf. Preface, p. 6, ed. 1712, etpassim). Mr. G.
H. Lewes, in the Prolegomena to his " History of Philosophy," has a definition
of Truth, which though doubtless sufficient for his purpose, seems too vague
and general to be of much service towards elucidating a discussion of which
the necessary starting-point is a clearly defined understanding of the meaning
(or meanings) of the word Truth (Cf. G. H. Lewes, "Biographical History of
Philosophy," Prolegomena, p. 31, 3rd ed.).


14
A Discourse on Truth.
If we fail to meet with this unifying element, we must
conclude, either that our wits are too feeble for the work
which we have in hand, or that two or more really
distinct meanings lie lurking under the cover of this one
word. The method is as old as Socrates, and has
always been known as the Socratic induction, though
its differences from induction in the modern sense are
so great as to render the use of a common name for
both extremely misleading.
I find that we talk of a truthful man, meaning by the
epithet one whose words are in accordance with his
thoughts, or more strictly speaking, one whose words
are such that according to the ordinary use of language
they will raise in the person to whom he is speaking
thoughts like to those which he has in his own mind on
the subject in hand. When, however, we say that a
statement is true, or a truth, we mean to express not
only its accordance with the present thoughts of the
speaker, but its further correspondence with some past
experience of himself or of some one else. If the
memory of a writer be defective, although he may
honestly and with pains explain to us the present state
of his belief as to some past event, at which he has been
present, we do not allow to his account the title of truth,
though none would deny to the writer himself the
epithet truthful. I believe that truth, in the most
ordinary and proper acceptation of the term, lies in this


Attempt at more satisfactory Definition. 15
double correspondence first between the words and the
thoughts of the speaker, and secondly between those
thoughts, and some past experience of himself or of
some one else. We frequently, by a kind of ellipsis of
thought leave out the middle term altogether, and talk
of a truth as that which is in accordance with facts.
But facts must mean either our experience or that of
some one else. If,then, the experience be ours, we con-
vert that experience into a truth by stating it, if it be
that of some other, then we can only know it through
his statement; and that statement is a truth according
to our definition.
To reduce our definition to terms of the three
classes of words, which themselves need no further
explanation, a further step is needful. We have said
that a truth is a statement which will raise in the
mind of the hearer, thoughts or ideas like to those of
the speaker; when those latter ideas exactly represent
the past experience of himself or some one else. By
experience we mean either sensations, activities, pr
emotions; by ideas, mental images of these; mind, I
fear, is a factor which we must leave unexplained, un-
less we say that its notion may be formed, like that of
the simple emotions, indirectly, by means of its external
signs; that, if I wish to give another a correct idea of
what I mean by mind, I must point to a number of
actions which betray intellect and forethought, and tell


i6
A Disco2irse 011 Truth.
him that I mean by mind that principle, or power, of
which he must be conscious within himself, by which he
would perform like activities. No words can make the
matter clearer to him.
We have now got an explanation of Truth in terms of
what we have called the simple elements of speech, and
we have seen that our definition will agree with the vast
majority of instances of man's use of the word. But we
must not lie down in slothful content with our discovery,
lest some enemy come and overthrow our fortress with
the engine of some fully acknowledged use of the word
which falls not within our definition. We must show
how all other uses which are in any way proper depend
upon, or are derived from, this central meaning, or, if
proof of this be not forthcoming, how it is that mankind
at large combine several discordant notions under one
name. We need not, however, harass ourselves about
any particular use of the word by any one man or set
of men, however distinguished he or they may be.
Common consent and usage is the only mint whose
stamp we need, or can, acknowledge. The import of this
proviso shall be seen hereafter.
I freely admit that there are several familiar uses
of the word Truth, and many more of its correspond-
ing adjectives (true and truthful), which can in no
way be squared to my definition. Let us examine
a few of the most important. We talk of a Truthful


Other uses of the Term.
17
Likeness, and a True Christian, and in neither case is
there any notion of speech or of its correspondence
with thought or fact. It may be said that these expres-
sions are metaphorical, and the first one, I think, is con-
fessedly so, while the second has, from frequent use, lost
all savour of metaphor, and seems to stand out as an
independent meaning of the word 'true,' since it cer-
tainly is not included in our former definition. That,
however, it is not an original use of the word may, I
think, be clearly seen from the fact that the substantive
Truth cannot be used in this connection. Christian
Truth is not the correlative of a true Christian, but
means something entirely different. What that some-
thing is we shall enquire later, meanwhile let us fix our
thoughts on the two instances which we have taken, and
which seem to me to have a similarity to each other.
Do we mean by a truthful likeness more than this—that
it is one which strictly resembles the face on which it is
modelled; or again, by a true Christian aught else than
one whose whole life is modelled on the pattern held up
in the Bible for his imitation ?' True,' in both these
expressions seems to mean merely 'like,' with this
addition—that the likeness to the pattern is in, both
cases produced by deliberate will of an intelligent
agent. Now let us turn back to our ordinary definition
of truth; here, too, we have a double likeness or corre-
spondence; first, between thought and experience;
c


18 A Discourse on Truth.
secondly, between words and thoughts. Moreover, this
second correspondence must necessarily be produced by
deliberate and intelligent volition. Now assuming that
the original sense of the term Truth was this corre-
spondence intelligently produced in one object-matter, to
wit, words, it might naturally be loosely extended to a
similar deliberate correspondence produced in another
object-matter, actions, marble, or what not. Such an
extension of usage is too common to call for any further
enquiry.
We now go forward with greater boldness to a more
difficult case. What is the meaning of a true prediction?
I mean not here to treat of infallible prophecies, but of
such forecasts of wise men as have been afterwards
justified by facts. It is obvious that our original defini-
tion will not serve our turn. There is here no corre-
spondence between the words of the new and the past
experience of himself or of any other man, or at least
it is not by virtue of any such correspondence that we
call his prediction true.
That there is a correspondence must be admitted, but
it is in inverse order, it lies not from facts to words, but
from words to facts. If we shall say that truth lies in
the correspondence between the two, and that the order
matters nought, then the truth in this case is a quality
not of the words but of the facts. It is the facts that
give to the words their truth, and this truth only arises


True Predictions.
19
at the moment of their fulfilment, and so far we do
not seem to be at variance from common opinion. We
talk of events falsifying prophecies, and might with equal
reason talk of their verifying them. But if the truth
only arises at the time of accomplishment, how is it that
at that very time we talk of this truth in the past tense?
We say, 'Now do I perceive that the prediction was
true?' Ought we not rather to say, 'Now is the pre-
diction true.' And how shall we account for so strange
and universal an error? I believe the solution of this
difficulty is not far to seek.
All those who have studied the Nature of Man,
have been forced to the humbling avowal that the
human mind notwithstanding its boasted superiority,
is as much the creature of habit, and finds as great
a difficulty in originating new activities as any of
the separate limbs. When it has once been accus-
tomed to follow one line of thought with regard to any
given object-matter, and to clothe it with one form of
words, it is apt lazily to transfer this form wholesale
to every similar object-matter, which is newly presented
to it, without closely considering whether the formula be
applicable to the new matter, nor even whether its appli-
cation may not give rise to inconsistencies and absurdi-
ties. Surely the consideration of this weakness and
sloth of the mind may help us to resolve our present
difficulty. Do we not see that in the vast majority of
c 2


20
A Discourse on Truth.
cases, where there is a correspondence between words
and facts, the facts come first and the words following
later agree thereto. The mind then is, by long use, in-
clined to consider the correspondence as perfected at the
moment when the words are uttered, and to this corre-
spondence at this moment it assigns the name Truth.
But when it extends the use of this latter word to those
comparatively rare cases of correspondence, wherein the
facts are the first term, and the words but the second, by
reason of this sloth whereof we have spoken, it still uses
a form of words, and perhaps even of thought, which
implies that the correspondence is complete, and that
therefore the truth is born, at the exact moment when it
is in the more ordinary order, to wit, when the words
are uttered. At this moment, in the case of predictions,
there is in fact no correspondence, since the first term—
the words—only is given, and the second term—the
facts—may never come forth from the womb of time.
But when, if ever, the facts make the long-ago spoken
words true, the common sort of mankind perceiving
that there is a truth (in this wider sense of correspon-
dence between words and facts), carelessly assumes that
this truth or correspondence must have arisen at the
time when it is accustomed to look for it—at the utter-
ance of the words—(which in such cases must always be
in past time); and therefore at the moment of the fulfil-
ment or the making-true of the prediction declares that


Truth of Scripture.
21
the prophecy was true, instead of using the more proper
form, 'it is true.'
When we say that the promises of the Bible are true,
I fancy that our words combine two distinct meanings.
To the believer these promises are the very words of
God Himself, with whom time is not, and who hath
knowledge of what shall be even as of what is, since
to Him all things now are. When, therefore, God
speaketh to man His will, there is necessarily that
double correspondence which is most properly called
Truth. 'God is not a man that He should lie,' therefore
do His words reveal His mind. He knoweth all things,
therefore do His thoughts contain, or duly represent, all
that hath been or shall be. This sense, then, is clear
enough. It is true that one, at least, and perhaps all
three of the kinds of experience which we have mentioned
are inapplicable to God ; but, however incomprehensible
the methods and nature of His knowledge may be to -
us, His Truth is His language in accordance with that
knowledge. But I think we mean to express, also, our
confident hope that these promises will be true to us in
the same way as ordinary predictions are true; that is,
that some day we shall perceive the facts agreeing with
the words we now know. In this sense we should, of
course, more properly say that the promises will be
true, since their truth is not yet perfected. But even
as before we changed the present into a past, so here,


22
A Discourse on Truth.
and for precisely the same reason, do we change the
future into a present.
There remains one most important order of truths
yet to discuss. We habitually talk of laws of nature as
true in the highest sense; and we should not be con-
sidered guilty of an impropriety of language, were we to
say, that a collection of all such laws would include the
whole realm of Human Truth. What mean we by Truth
in this context? It seems to me that these laws are true
in three of the senses which we have noticed above. First,
many of them (as the axioms of mathematics and the
more obvious physical laws) are true in the sense of
being exact statements of the experience of innumer-
able men.* The number and comparative unimportance
of the persons who made the statement renders the
ellipsis of the speaker, which we have already noticed,
so easy as to be absolutely imperceptible. Secondly,
many of the wider laws, as, for instance, that of
gravity, cannot be said to be correct statements of
experience in any of the senses into which we have
analysed that term (see p. 15), since we obviously have
no direct consciousness of such laws. These are rather,
I think, to be classed as prophecies which have been
fulfilled, and therefore become true in an innumerable
number of cases. Thus, the position of any given star,
* But see infra, Chapter VIII., where the nature of that experience is
explained.


True Laws of Nature.
23
or the general appearance of the heavens at any given
day or hour, has been innumerable times predicted by
the use (among other data) of the law of gravity, and
on each occasion, when the day or hour came round,
the eyes of many men have directly confirmed the truth
of the prophecy.* Lastly, both these two classes of
laws of nature are regarded as prophecies which we
hope will be fulfilled in an innumerable number of
future cases. What is our warrant for this expectation
we shall consider later, but for the present may be
content with noticing that this expectation will justify
us in applying to the laws of nature the name Truth in
the second of the two senses which we found applicable
to the promises of the Bible.
I have searched my own thoughts, and the common
speech of mankind, and can find no other meaning of
our term which is universal. If any man knoweth of
one and will instruct me, I profess myself his willing
disciple, but in the meantime go forward with no slight
confidence that I have explored every corner of this not
very extended field. I sum up, then, to this effect. All
the more proper uses of the word Truth imply some
kind of correspondence between words, thoughts, and
* This view of the nature of true laws, which was propounded by
Whewell, is contested by Mill (Cf. "Mill's Logic," Book III., Chapter II.).
I fail to see the force of his arguments, which however will stand or fall with
his doctrine of Causation, to be hereafter discussed.


24
A Discourse on Truth.
facts, but the name is loosely applied to the two trun-
cated halves of any one such complex correspondence;
that is, either to a simple correspondence between two
thoughts and facts, or to a similar agreement between
words and thoughts. It is, moreover, with still greater
latitude, applied to a few other correspondences, which
do not consist of these three parts; as, for instance, that
between the marble and the human form. In all cases,
however, there is a correspondence or similarity between
two or more things, and it is this which constitutes the
most important element in the notion of Truth.
We must now return to the philosophers, with humble
apologies for having neglected them so long, and
enquire of them, What is that supreme Truth whereof
they are for ever talking, whose worth outvalues all
lesser and partial truths, and from which alone they de-
rive their validity? Which be the terms in whose corre-
spondence it consists? To this I find it hard to get any
direct and positive answer; but I easily meet with a
multitude of indirect and negative ones. I am told that
it is Truth for all intelligence. But Truth for all intelli-
gence cannot be accordance between the experience of
any individual intelligent being and his words or
thoughts; for we know that the sensations of different
human beings vary greatly, and the variation would be
indefinitely extended if we imagined other orders of
intelligent beings, as the majority of the philosophers


Truth Absolute.
25
bid us do. In fact, on this point there is a marvellous
agreement between them. They all aver that the
Truth they seek is nothing phaenomenal, that is, nought
which may be directly gained from sense. Still less
can it be accordance between the words or thoughts of
any being and his emotions or activities, for these are
confessedly more various in different individuals than are
even the sensations. Their Truth, then, is not the Truth
whereof we have all along been talking.
But they will doubtless tell us that our definition of
experience is too narrow, and that there are other ele-
ments thereof which we have omitted. Let them name
them, then, and say with what element of experience
their thought or their words are in accord, when they
gain or state their Truth for all intelligence. Or will
they altogether reject our definition of Truth? I know
full well that in matters of this nature every man runs
great danger of error, but I would humbly remind them
that it was their neglect of what seemed a most impor-
tant part of their duty which launched me forth on my
dangerous voyage.
Even now, at the eleventh hour, I will humbly accept
correction, but I make this alone stipulation. Let their
definition, when they produce it, not only cover their
peculiar use, but be at least equally applicable with
mine to all the common usages of the word. Nay, say
they, the thing we seek differs in kind from aught that


26
A Discourse on Truth.
common men conceive or talk of. So be it, and I leave
you in possession thereof; yet why apply to your rare
discovery a name which is used by plain men in an
entirely different signification? By all means, if you
will, use every word in a sense that is not apprehended
by the vulgar, and were you not the great philosophers
that you are, I should say that you reminded me of noth-
ing so much as of children who delight to interchange in
the nursery a gibberish which is not understood of their
elders. Meanwhile, I fear me, I must plod soberly along
with my task without your aid.
Of all the varieties of Truth which we have gone
through, there are two only with which I shall deal in
this book—Truth in the most ordinary sense of the word
by which a man communicates his experience and that
of others, and true laws of nature. I shall inquire how
t far a man can by words arouse in another a state of
thought resembling his present thought and his past
experience, and what are the surest methods for so doing.
+ Secondly, I shall consider our means for discovering true
laws of nature, the character of the evidence which
induces us to believe in them, the value of these laws
themselves, and our warranty that they will remain
true for all time.
And here I beg leave to give a warning which I
ought, perhaps, more properly to have placed at the
beginning of my book. I write not solely nor specially


Apologetic.
27
for the learned, of whom the greater part will doubtless
condemn my work. I appeal to any man of ordinary
candour and understanding who will be at the pains of
considering these matters with me. As I cannot, there-
fore, assume a knowledge of preceding systems or
writings, I shall often enter into explanations and
digressions which may seem to those who have drunk
deeply of philosophy, or even, as is the more frequent
case, skimmed lightly over its surface, both tedious and
impertinent. Of this my intention I have already given
them a foretaste in what I have written above. If they
mislike it let them shut the book, for I shall persevere
in it to the end. I would rather waken up to sincere and
unprejudiced considerations of these questions one plain
man of unbiassed understanding than secure the tepid
approval of all the judges of philosophic style in the
universe. The real lover of Truth, be he learned or
unlearned, will have patience with me to the end, if only
he shall judge that I too am an earnest worshipper of
his goddess. The approval of one who is both learned
and earnest I prize above all things; that of him who is
earnest without being learned, I highly esteem; but for
him who has been corrupted by a various diet of philo-
sophies not having a digestion strong enough to assimi-
late any, I care not for his strictures, neither value his
praise.
I fear me greatly that, notwithstanding this my pro-


28
A Discourse on Truth.
fession, I shall not be able in all cases to avoid the use
of technical phrases or elaborate arguments. The
nature of the subject must needs lead me at times into
intricacies which will tax the attention; and to attempt
to explain every term whose, use was necessitated by a
controversy or quotation, would be as futile as it would
be tiresome. I will promise, however, to restrict as
much as possible the number of such technical terms,
and, if it may be, to keep my main argument entirely
free from them.


CHAPTER II.
ON DEFINITION.
The object of all speech being the raising in the
mind of another like ideas to those which are present at
the moment in the soul of the speaker, it is above all
things necessary that the speaker himself should have
assurance that each one of his individual words 'will
convey to the listener the same impression that it pro-
duces on him. The only way by which he can make
certain that this is the case, is by defining carefully each
word about which he thinks there can possibly be any
doubt. That is, by stating as fully as possible what
ideas the utterance of the word wakes in his mind. If
his hearer had before no notion at all of the meaning of
the word, he will now be able intelligently to follow a
discourse which otherwise would be meaningless to him;
if, on the other hand, the word does raise ideas in his
mind, and those ideas differ in any way from those
which the speaker attaches to the word, the definition
will disclose the discrepancy and prevent numberless
errors and misunderstandings. To use a familiar illus-


3Q
A Discourse on Truth.
tration: if I wish to explain to a countryman the merits
of the Franco-German war, I shall labour in vain until
I discover that he considers Frenchman as the equiva-
lent of foreigner, but when having made that discovery
I get him to understand and accept my more limited use
of the word, the chief difficulty of my task will be
removed. Clear definition then is a necessary first step
in the communication of Truth. We must now ask
what is the best form into which such definition should
be thrown.
We saw in the last chapter that there were two grand
classes of words—those whose meaning must necessarily
be explained by words, and those which might be
explained by some more direct process. It might seem
then, that in treating of definition we were only con-
cerned with the former class, and might consider all
verbal explanation of the latter superfluous. It may
appear strange, then, if in my discussion of definition I
limit myself almost entirely to one subdivision of this
second class of words, yet the reason for my so doing is
not far to seek. In truth we have already said almost all
there is to say as to the definition of those words which
are names of things, whose notion is not capable of
being directly conveyed to any other person. They can
only be properly defined by combinations of words as to
whose meaning we can come to some direct agreement
either by pointing or by some other of the processes of


Words which require Definition. 31
which we have before spoken. Even by this method of
combination we can, in many cases, get only a vague
and doubtful idea, nor can we ever be quite certain that
the terms we use are understood in exactly the same
sense by our companion. The reason of this is, that in
such cases, as, for instance, when talking of a complex
emotion, such as that produced by music, at least a
great proportion of the terms we use must be borrowed
from the external world, and such terms can never be
strictly applicable to our internal consciousness.
Since then, in ultimate resort, all our correctness of
language depends upon our proper use of the second
class of terms, and since it is with regard to these only
that we can arrive at a perfectly definite agreement, it
is all important that we should not fail in a matter
which Nature has placed so entirely in our own hands.
Yet success is neither so easy nor so obvious as it at
first appears. With regard to two out of our three sub-
classes of original terms, we have indeed the means
always ready to hand of conveying a just idea. We can
always counterfeit the outward signs of an emotion, or
perform before our companion any simple activity; but
the third class presents greater difficulties. If I had
always around me at the moment of discussion the
whole visible and tangible universe, I apprehend that no
definition of external things would ever be given or
required; the simple method of referring our companion


A Discourse on Truth.
to his own eyes and other senses, would always be
resorted to; for it is to this process that the ultimate
appeal must always be made. But since the number of
things which can at any moment be thus directly referred
to is necessarily extremely small, in almost every case I
have to betake myself to language, and it therefore
behoves me to consider in what words my definitions of
sensible things should be couched.
The first obvious method of describing sufficiently an
absent object, is to mention some present or well-known
object to which it bears a considerable resemblance, and
to declare wherein the thing to be described differs
therefrom; this is the method almost universally em-
ployed by the vulgar, neither is it in any way scien-
tifically indefensible. To describe a tiger as "a mighty
big cat that lives in the woods out here in India, and
eats oxen and horses," or Vesuvius as "for all the world
just like the hill over our village, only a sight bigger,
and with a great round hole at the top," would probably
be to raise as accurate an idea of the thing described as
would be in any way possible in the mind of the person
spoken to.
But this method is in very many, perhaps in most
cases inapplicable. To give an accurate idea of an
elephant to a person who had never seen one by com-
paring it with any of our English animals would be
obviously impossible. Moreover, in almost all cases


Undefinable Objects of Sense. 33
there is a vagueness in the account of the differences
between the thing described and that to which we liken
it, which vagueness must needs be reflected in the mind
of the listener.
If, then, we can find a method of definition of external
objects which is universally applicable, it will be well, for
the sake of simplicity and consistency, to apply it even
in cases where the method of comparison with familiar
objects will afford as accurate, and perhaps a more vivid
idea of the thing defined. Such a method is yet to seek;
but after what we have already said, it may not be hard
to find. Let us see first, however, whether all things
which are presented to our senses are in any way
definable. Supposing a man to be blind, it is agreed
by all philosophers and physicians that it is absolutely
impossible to give him any notion of distinctions be-
tween colours. Again, suppose him, as is often the case,
to be blind with regard to only one particular colour, to
be insensible, for instance, to the distinctions between
green and blue, here, too, no words can in any way
enlighten him. He may know that others are conscious
of a distinction which he knows not, but of what that
distinction may be he can form no conception whatso-
ever. We may say the same thing of distinctions be-
tween sounds in the case of a deaf man, and that
between tastes in one of a vitiated or insensible palate.
Generally we may affirm that of any simple experience


34
A Discourse on Truth.
due to any of the five senses no one can form an
adequate conception, who has not himself received it.
V But this incapacity for definition is not the only pecu-
liarity of the simple sensational experiences. They
have also this important quality, that they (or at least
the most important of them) are continually reproduced
in a number of objects which are otherwise utterly
unlike, and thus enable us to convey an idea of at least
certain qualities of those objects to one who has never
seen them. Thus, he who has seen a certain shade of
deep blue on a sky or a dress, may form a sufficiently
exact notion of the colour of the Mediterranean sea if
he be told that it exactly resembles this shade. Nor is
this all. Our experiences of natural objects are, in fact,
mere combinations of the simple sensations. It might
seem obvious to any man not a philosopher, that he
learns all he knows, or can know of any external object,
by means of his five senses, and though certain philoso-
phers have doubted this statement, it becomes us not
to puzzle ourselves with these subtleties, but to go
straight forward in the light of plain common sense.
Seeing, then, that we have agreed that our ideas are
the result of our experience, and that all our external
experience is the result of a combination of these
simple sensations, it follows of necessity that all our
ideas of external objects should be combinations of the
simple ideas representing these simple sensations—that


Elements of Definition.
35
our idea of this or that special plant, for instance, should
be merely a combination of simple ideas of its colour,
smell, taste, &c. It is true that we have also notions
of its size, weight, shape, &c, which we do not get
directly from sensation, but by the comparison of
several sensations (for I must be able to remember the
weights of other minerals before I can say that lead is
heavy or light). Since, however, these notions are
built up out of several simple sensations, we may say,
generally, that all our knowledge of the external world
may be ultimately analyzed into a number of simple
sensations variously combined.
Philosophers, from the time of Locke, have been
wont to call the mental reproductions of these simple
sensations our simple ideas, and to say that the best
way to define any given external object was to state the
simple ideas which are combined in its compound
notion. Thus, for instance, a correct definition of a
plough would be a statement of all the simple ideas
which we associate with its name—its colour, shape, size,
weight, &c. (several of these ideas are, as I said above,
not strictly speaking simple ideas, but as they have been
very long ago and very easily constructed out of such
simple ideas, they are usually, for convenience, treated
as such). We shall add thereto a statement of its uses,
which themselves are known by simple ideas, and can be
resolved into them, and our definition will be complete.
I) z


36 A Discourse on Truth.
So far we have travelled along the beaten track of
English philosophy, and arrived at a result which by
far the majority of modern logical writers could accept,
but when we come to probe the matter deeper, and to
ask what are the simple ideas which we habitually
associate with the name, and whether all or only some
of them should be used in definition, I fear we shall
discover a gulf between our doctrine and that of the
Schools which can in no wise be bridged over.
I may take one step further on firm ground, and say
that philosophers are agreed in calling the qualities of a
thing those of its powers by which its nature is made
known to us. For instance, heat is a quality of fire, and
produces in us a direct sensation. It is the quality of a
magnet to attract iron, and that quality makes itself
manifest to our sight, and if need be, to our touch.
Whether all the qualities of the object make themselves
known to us by means of sensation, or whether some be
not communicated in some other fashion, is a question
much debated among philosophers. I follow the majority
of English philosophers in holding that sensation is our
only source of knowledge of external nature; but the
difference of opinion on this point has little or no bear-
ing on the subject in hand, since those who imagine
that certain qualities of external things are known to us
otherwise than by sensation have included amongst
them few, if any, qualities which are not common to all


What qualities should enter into Definition. 3 7
objects, such as extension, that is the filling of a definite
portion of space. Such qualities can obviously form
no part of a definition which is intended to enable us to
distinguish an object from all others.
What then are the qualities which should enter into
the definition of an object? All that the name connotes,
say the sages. That is, all the sensations which that
name recalls to me. But it is obvious that to each one
of us it may recall a somewhat different set of sensations,
according to the varieties of experience. To a man who
has just torn his hand in a rose-bush, the notion of the
possession of thorns will form a very prominent portion
of the general idea of the rose-tree, while in the ordinary
mind that idea, though no doubt somewhere present, is
latent, and is not immediately called forth by the name.
Again, to the man of science the name of any metal or
chemical substance will suggest innumerable qualities
which represent experiences of his own, but which are
absolutely unknown to the majority of mankind. Shall
we then say that the only perfect definition is that which
represents both ordinary experience and scientific know-
ledge with regard to the thing defined? I pray you to
consider whether such definitions will not continually
increase in bulk as science advances, and will not ulti-
mately become so unwieldy as to be absolutely useless.
Or are we to take the scientific definition only r This
obviously would, in many cases, not enable an ordinary


38
A Discourse on Truth.
man to recognise the thing defined when he came across
it. Or, lastly, shall we include only the most common
qualities in our definition r To this course there are two
serious objections; for in the first place it is almost im-
possible to ascertain with any certainty what are the
most common1 qualities of the object as discovered by
the experience of all mankind; and in the second place,
it is by no means certain that these common qualities,
if discovered, would enable us to distinguish the object
from all others, since between objects whose occult
qualities differ very widely, the more obvious differences
are often but small and little noticed.
Is there then no way out of the labyrinth? I think
there is; and that one which will enable us to give, in
some respects, more satisfactory and complete definitions
than even the cumbrous process which the logicians
seem to recommend. Let us consider a little more
closely what the object of a definition is. We have said
that it is to produce in the hearer a state of mind with
regard to the given object as nearly as may be similar
to that of the speaker. Now the speaker presumably
possesses a number of ideas about the object resulting
from a more or less frequent experience of it, but there
is more in his mind than a mere chaos of detached ideas.
These ideas, as it seems to me, form a regular system,
arranged in a definite order, and even were it possible
for him to convey to his hearer all these ideas according


Limitation of Definition.
39
to the requirement of the logicians, his work would yet
be most imperfect and defective, if he merely poured
them out higgledy-piggledy, and forebore to make the
hearer understand that in his own mind, and in the
minds of other people, who had seen the object, there was
a certain arrangement of ideas in thinking of it, so that
both he and they always began with one idea or set of
ideas, and went on to others, but not vice versa. If, from
the number of ideas which the name of the object sug-
gested to him it were impossible to include all in his
definition, it would obviously be wiser to content him-
self with naming those which naturally came first into
his mind and the minds of others, since presumably
these would be the more important. My object is to
discover if there be any principle by which we can
determine what are those first ideas of each object
which may most suitably be used for a definition. The
task, I think, will not be a hard one.
The order of ideas in the mind as to any object is in
nowise arbitrary. Even as the ideas themselves, or at
least all those of which we now treat, have their ori-
ginals in sensation, so is the order in which they occur
correspondent with the order in which the sensations
which we have received from the object have occurred
in the different times when we have met with it. Were
the order of sensations absolutely variable, then would
the ideas occur at one time in one order and at another
*


40
A Discourse on Truth.
in another; but in almost every case the order of sen-
sation is fixed with regard to any one object, and in by
far the greater number of instances the sensations with
which on each occasion we begin our experience of any
object, belong to the same organ of sense. Of this at
length.
Let us suppose ourselves fully endowed with all
natural faculties. Let us for the first time view a plant
or flower as we are passing it on the railway or in a car-
riage. On this occasion the only knowledge we get of
it is through our eyes, and our only idea of it must
necessarily be of the nature of a picture. But now sup-
pose that we be botanists or herbalists; we set out then
in search of the plant; we see it at a distance; and we
then approach it and smell it; perhaps we also feel it
and make remarks on its texture. Yet a third time, we
send for it and have it placed in our study or labora-
tory; we enter the room and perceive it on the table.
We make experiments which give us further knowledge,
that is, more multitudinous ideas with regard to it. Now,
after some days or months, let some other person or us
ourselves mention that object's name. That name re-
calls to us at once all or some portion of the sensations
we have experienced from that object, but it recalls
not all at once, nor all with equal strength. First come
back to us those sensations which on each of the three
occasions on which we have seen the object were first


Order of Sensation.
41
presented to us, to wit, those which we gained through
our eyes. We should recall first ideas of its form and
colour, in fact a picture of the object. On these would
follow, and in many cases after a perceptible interval,
ideas of the other sensations which on the various occa-
sions had followed those of sight. Moreover, as the
appearance of the object had been presented to us on
all three occasions, whereas its other qualities had per-
haps none of them been presented to us on all (as in
the instance we have taken), and certainly had not been
present with us so long, since we probably looked upon
the object while we were noticing its smell and taste or
sensation to the touch; it follows naturally that unless
there be any disturbing cause, our notion of the appear-
ance of the object would be much more strong and vivid
than that of any of its other qualities.
It is true that the vividity with which we realise a
sensation does not depend solely on the frequency of its
occurrence, since the vividity of the sensation itself on a
single occasion will produce an idea of a strength which
may fully equal that created by several weaker sensa-
tions. Thus a man who has been burnt will for a long
time connect with the name of fire the notion of acute
pain, rather than that of pleasing warmth, although the
latter sensation has been far the more frequent in his
experience. But these disturbing causes are neither
frequent when compared with the whole bulk of sensa-


42
A Discourse on Truth.
tion, nor are they in any way calculable, so that we must
put them aside when we attempt a scientific treatment
of the subject. Disregarding them, we arrive at the
conclusion that the notion which we get through our
eyes of any given external object is, as a rule, both first
in point of time, and infinitely more vivid, than that
which is due to any other sense. Not only is this the
case, but in most cases the sensations due to the other
senses follow no definite order. Many things, as for
instance a cherry or an apple, I may one day touch
without tasting, and the next taste without touching,
and there is no reason, except the greater vividity of
one of the two experiences, why the idea of one sensa-
tion should follow rather than that of the other, after
the visual image which we form when we hear the name
of the fruit mentioned.
I have said that in most cases the first set of sensa-
tions which we get from any natural object on any
occasion when we meet with it comes from our eyes.
We must observe, however, that this rule, although very
general, is not absolutely universal. There are sub-
stances, such as assafcetida or garlic, of which the smell
is both presented to us earlier than the taste and en-
dures longer, that is, is still felt by us after the object
has disappeared from sight. In these cases our first
and, in fact, almost only notion which is aroused by the
name, is an idea or remembrance of a sensation of smell


Visual Sensations usually come first. 43
and the thing would be most aptly defined in terms of
smell, were it not that to distinguish in words between
varieties of smell is much more difficult, and much
more liable to error, than to state distinctions of shape,
size, and colour which are presented to our eyes.
Let us place ourselves in fancy in the middle of a
landscape, and consider how very few of the objects be-
fore us affect us in any way except through our eyes.
Those clouds above us may, it is true, fall on us in rain,
but we cannot associate in thought the sensation of being
wet by a storm with any one cloud, since we have much
more frequently than not watched the clouds without
any such sensation. Of all the trees and acres of corn
and grass which form the picture, shall we touch one
leaf or one blade of grass in a million? Or have we any
distinct notion as to the difference of feeling between
the substance of an oak-leaf and that of an elm-leaf,
although we can easily distinguish them by the eye? The
air we perceive, is fragrant with innumerable scents of
flowers, but the Spring's 'breath is blending all blasts of
fragrance into one,' and how few of us could distinguish
the different scents which are due to each blossom!
The reports of the eyes then furnish us not only with
the first and most vivid impressions of almost all natural
objects, but with regard to by far the larger number
give us literally all the knowledge which we individu-
ally and directly have of them. (I put aside for the


A Discourse on Truth.
moment the knowledge which we may get from books,
or from those who have made it their business to enquire
more deeply into the qualities of these substances.) It
seems naturally to follow that of all these objects our
primary and central notion will be a representation of
the thing as it appears to our eyes, and that any other
qualities of that thing of which we may happen to have
experience or knowledge will follow in thought with
greater or less rapidity, after this central picture has
been roused by the nrention of the name.
I appeal to any man to interrogate his own conscious-
ness, and say whether his notion of any given thing is
not chiefly—I had almost said entirely—a picture of
that thing as it appears to his eyes. If this be the case,
and definition be, as we have been told, an explication
of our notion or concept of any thing, then the only
way in which we can at once avoid tedious length, and
give to our hearer as complete as possible a notion of
the state of mind aroused in us by the mention of the
name, will be to give as full as possible a description
of those qualities which are presented to our sight, the
colour, size, shape, etc.
We shall affirm then that a correct definition of any-
thing is that which describes it as we see it, and that
the thing of which we think and talk is primarily that
which we see. We shall in future, therefore, in talk-
ing about things, or our ideas of things, mean always


Things and Attributes.
45
to express things visible, and the number of simple
ideas of sight which make up our whole mental picture
of the thing. The other qualities of the thing which we
experience later, its smell, etc., we shall call its attri-
butes. No attribute in this sense of the word need ever
enter into our definition of the thing; nor do they in
ordinary conversation. For any special purpose in dis-
cussion or instruction, it may be important to add to the
definition proper of the thing, some one or more of its
most important attributes, as for instance, after describ-
ing to a child the appearance of deadly nightshade, I
should tell him that its berries were poisonous. But
what this additional attribute may be, and to what sense
it may belong, depend entirely upon the subject of the
discourse. With the description 6f the appearance of
the thing the invariable and universal portion of the
definition ends.
I have now answered to my own satisfaction the ques-
tion which we set ourselves at the outset ' What is
the correct definition of an individual external object?' but
the logicians will neither admit that this is the correct
solution, nor that the question which we proposed was
in any way soluble. They will say that we can only de-
fine classes of things, such as Dog or Horse, and that
this or that special dog or horse, we may describe but
cannot define. They affirm that the only words which
are properly the subject of definitions, are those which


46
A Discourse on Truth.
have a meaning; that dog or setter has a meaning, but
that Carlo or Shot, as applied to a dog has none. I
confess that I do not think this distinction deserves all
the importance that is usually attributed to it. No
name has any meaning of itself, that is, does not natu-
rally give rise to any notions beyond that of its sound,
but by being habitually applied to the same objects it in
time arouses in us all the notions which we have gained
from those objects. The name Carlo arouses in me only,
or in me and my intimate friends, a number of ideas and
memories of which the central and most important one is
the picture of a beloved dog. The name setter arouses
in me and a much larger number of men, but by no
means all mankind, nor even all Englishmen, a less
vivid group of ideas, of which the central one is a some-
what misty picture of a dog of a certain size, shape, and
colour. Now if I wish to communicate to some per-
son, who knows not Carlo nor the meaning of the
word setter, a correct representation of the ideas aroused
in my mind by each of the two words respectively, I
shall obviously use the same process in both cases. The
fact that the ideas aroused by the word setter, are com-
mon to a much larger number of people than those
awakened by the hearing of the name Carlo, will no
doubt render my information as to the effect of the for-
mer word on me much more valuable to my hearer than
like information as to the latter word, but it can in no


Definition of Class-Names.
47
way affect the method by which I impart that informa-
tion.
But let us meet our assailants on their own ground,
and inquire what is the best method of defining a class
of natural things, such as horse, dog, or minnow. This
question, according to our former agreement, is merely
the equivalent of the following:—What is the best
method of conveying to any person the idea or group
of ideas suggested to us by the words 'horse,' &c.?
Now it seems obvious, and is agreed by most of the
philosophers, that we can have no general idea of the
class Horse, except by means of our memory of indi-
vidual horses. Some have gone so far as to affirm that
the general name always arouses in our mind some
individual memory, that when I try to conceive the
notion of a horse generally I always in fact picture
to myself some individual horse which I know better
than all others. I do not, however, think it necessary
that we should go to this length, which would of course
amount to a denial of the possibility of forming any
general ideas whatsoever. We may and must allow
that any definite picture which we form in our minds
must be individual, and that such an individual picture
will in almost all cases be the copy of some individual
experience; though even here, something must be
allowed for the power of fancy in uniting portions
which in experience have always been detached. But


48
A Discourse on Truth.
not even in the external world is everything presented
to us in definitely marked outline. If I look out of my
window to-day, and survey the view, the near trees and
houses stand out sharply, while the distant hills fade
away in hot mist. Of the former I have a clear image,
of the latter hardly more than hazy suggestions. As it
is with the outward world of sight, so surely may it be
with the inward world of ideas. An individual idea
seems to me to resemble some detached object, each part
of which we can survey and examine minutely. A
general idea is like a wide-stretching landscape, whereof
portions stand out clear in the sunlight, while the
remoter regions fade away in the distance. What,
then, are the clearly marked, and what the misty
and doubtful features of this complex whole? The
fixed and vivid portion will consist of those quali-
ties which have been common to all our experi-
ences of the individual members of the class. The
vague and shadowy background will consist of quali-
ties which have varied in different members of the
class with whom we have met. Other things being
equal, each individual experience will count as a single
unit towards the forming of the general idea. The chief
exceptions to this rule are that instances nearer in time
will have more effect than those more remote, and that
those in which we have taken an interest, or in which
our attention has been excited by the conjunction of our


Growth of General Ideas.
49
experience with some violent emotion, whether pleasur-
able or painful, will counterbalance a very large number
of mere ordinary neutral-tinted experiences. Thus, my
own pet dog, whom I have seen hundreds of times, and
whom I love, will have a far greater share in forming my
general idea of the class Dog than any other single
animal. Yet will not his image correspond with my
notion of the class, for that notion will be modified by
my experience of many other dogs, and the individual
peculiarities of my own dog will become hazy in the
general idea in exact proportion to the extent of my
experience, while the common qualities of all dogs
will stand out more clearly by contrast.
If I have not erred in my account of the nature and
growth of general ideas, I may safely conclude, First,
that if the sensations which I received from the indivi-
duals have followed a definite order on each occasion
when I have met with a member of the class, the ideas
in my general notion of the class will follow the same
order. Second, that if a certain species of sensations
have a superior clearness and steadiness in each indi-
vidual experience, the ideas representing the same
species will be most vividly represented in the general
notion. Now we have before seen that the sensations
given us by the eyes both come first in almost every
individual experience, and are by far the most perma-
nent. It follows then that the ideas of these are the first
E


50
A Discourse on Truth.
in order, and by far the most important in the general
notion, and will most suitably form the centre of our
definition; and, in fact, if that definition is not to
stretch itself out to an unwieldy size, and wander away
into regions where the thoughts of the greater portion
of the people who use the word will not follow it, it
must stop at a general description of the appearance
to the eyes of the class of objects defined. Thus our
former labour has not been thrown away, even al-
though we restrict the use of definition within the limits
assigned to it by logicians.
It may be objected that although we admit that the
visual appearances of the respective individuals in the
class form the first and most important parts of each
individual experience, yet these individual images vary so
greatly, that it will be impossible that they should com-
bine to form one picture. They would simply oblite-
rate each other. The objection is an important one,
and, as far as it goes, perfectly valid; but I would ask,
Is there any one quality of which we have ordinary
experience, and which is naturally suggested to the un-
scientific mind by the name, which is one whit more
stable through all the members of the class, than the
more important portions of the general appearance?
That there are qualities which are invariably present in
all members of the class, and which enable us to give a
scientific definition of it, I willingly admit, but these


Wide General Notions Impossible. 51
qualities are not such as are immediately and fre-
quently presented to the notice of the ordinary observer,
and do not therefore form a portion of the notion sug-
gested by the class-name. According, therefore, to the
admission of the logicians, these invariable qualities
ought not to form a portion of the common definition
of that class-name. There remain no others which are
equally fitted for this definition with those which we
used for what I have been bold enough to call the defi-
nition of an individual name—those which constitute the
least variable portions of the appearance to the eyes of
all the members of the class.
The objection which I have just mentioned, and the
observation on which it is founded, suggest a very im-
portant question. Can we, and do we, form general
ideas of widely extended classes? I think that to this
question we can, in the light of what has gone before,
return only one answer. The more widely we extend
the limits qf a class, the greater variation is there be-
tween the different members with regard to all qualities,
whether visual or otherwise. Each variation renders
our general notion more misty, till the whole picture
becomes one blur. If I interrogate my own conscious-
ness, I find I can form a fairly definite notion or mental
image of a Gordon Setter or Retriever, but that it is
difficult, if not impossible, to form one of a dog. If we
limit the use of the term natural kind or class to that
e 2


52
A Discourse on Truth.
of which we can form some sort of mental idea or pic-
ture, or to express the same thing in other words, of
which we can give a true natural definition, such classes
will not rise far above the generality of those which the
Logicians call Infimae Species, or lowest and most narrow
kinds. All classes wider than these I shall call artifi-
cial, as representing no single mental idea or picture.
Of these wider classes and their definition I shall treat
below.
In the meantime I would desire my reader to mark,
that even if we limit definition to the description of the
mental image which arises in the mind on the mention
of the name of the class, and which represents as well
as it may the actual appearance of the individuals,
yet can the advance of science greatly alter, enlarge,
and improve our definitions. In almost all species of
animals, plants, etc., there are certain marks which,
though not sufficiently striking to arrest our attention,
are always presented to us whensoever we view those
animals, and thus, as it were, lie latent in the idea of
the class. Now, if it happen that any of these marks
are important from a scientific point of view, as belong-
ing to all individuals in the class, and as distinguishing
them from individuals of another class, which otherwise
greatly resemble them in appearance; by calling at-
tention to any such important mark, Science can render
it no longer a latent but henceforth an active portion of


Artificial Classes.
53
our experience of each individual, and thus for the future
a vivid portion of our general idea.
We have now arrived at a conception of definition for
individual names, and for those of low or small natural
classes, which is in exact accordance with our statement
of the nature of Truth in general, but when we come
to treat of names of wider classes, and their definitions,
difficulties thicken upon us.
We desire first to discover what, in fact, one of these
wider classes is; Secondly, and as a consequence of this
discovery, whether we have any general notion of such
a class; Thirdly, by what means, if at all, I can truly
define such a class.
Let us take, for instance, the word animal. That I have
no mental picture of an animal like that which I have
of a Newfoundland, seems to me too obvious to require
proof. That I have a notion of breathing is true, but it
is always indissolubly combined with the idea of the
creature who performs the action. I can imagine a
breathing horse, dog, or man, but a creature breathing
and not being some one kind of known animal, I can
in no way picture to myself. Breathing, in fact, is
a quality whose idea is indissolubly connected with a
considerable number of varying mental pictures, but
which vanishes from the mind the moment the mental
picture to which it is at the time attached is re-
moved. I can no more conceive it apart from some


54
A Discourse on Truth.
individual breathing thing, than I can conceive colour
altogether separated from form. Since, however, I
have noticed that this quality belongs to a number
of diverse things, instead of stating this fact in the form,
Horses breathe, Dogs breathe, Pigs breathe, etc., I sum
up my experience in the form 'Horses, Dogs, and Pigs
are Animals, or Breathing Creatures,' the two expressions
properly meaning precisely the same thing. The latter,
sentence is a kind of mental and verbal shorthand for the
former. But the shorthand process does not end here. In
the same way as it was noticed that horses, dogs, etc., all
breathed, so too it was remarked that, sooner or later,
they all died, and a sentence was therefore constructed
summing up this experience like the former one in the
terms Dogs, Horses, etc., are mortal. Now, it was
noticed that all the Natural Classes who had the
quality of breathing, sooner or later presented to us
the experience of their decay and death, and having
already formed the artificial term Animal, which
binds together all these classes, mankind were able
to state still more shortly their experience of the
death of horses, dogs, etc., by saying 'all animals
are mortal.'
I call the term Animal artificial, since it represents no
Natural Class, and calls up into the mind no single
picture. In the same way the sentence ' All animals are
mortal' is artificial, as requiring to be translated into


Natural and Artificial Sentences.
55
the number of sentences for which it stands before it
conveys any definite notions. I can think that dogs
are mortal, since I can form a picture of a dog,
and superinduce on it the ideas of phenomena which I
know to be signs of death. That animals are mortal
I can in no wise think till I have first written out in
full in my mind the word animal into horse, dog, pig,
etc., or some of them.
I may notice that from this point of view a simple or
natural sentence is that whose subject is the name of
a thing of which we can form a mental image, as Pig
or Dog (if, indeed, we must not go yet lower for our
Natural Kinds of some of the best-known animals), and
whose predicate is an adjective expressing some quality
which belongs (or does not belong in negative proposi-
tions) to the subject. Here the proposition represents
at once and simply a mental state or process—the
envisaging of the thing as possessed or deprived of the
attribute.
All other propositions as to external things are artifi-
cial, as representing no one mental state, but as stand-
ing symbolically for many, and requiring to be broken
up into one or more of those simpler sentences for
which they stand before they can in any way affect the
mind of the hearer. If I be told that no carnivora
have cloven hoofs, I run over in my mind the Dog, the
Cat, the Lion, and other natural classes with which I am


56 A Discourse on Truth.
acquainted, and consider the attribute to be denied of
each of them successively. Then, and then only, has
the sentence any meaning for me.
We see, then, that any of these larger classes is
formed for the purpose of brevity of speech, by means
of a word which suggests or connotes a quality of which
we can form no separate idea, but which we have often
noticed as the attribute of many known Natural Kinds.
Any word connoting an attribute common to several
classes may be thus used, for the purpose of making an
artificial class, but the choice of such words is not
altogether arbitrary. There are certain qualities which
are common to a number of natural kinds which have
nought else in common. These will obviously be useless
for the formation of artificial classes, since no other
quality will be truly predicable of the class as a whole.
If Leopards, Tigers, Antelopes, etc., be all spotted
animals, but have no one quality in common besides
their spottedness, it will be absolutely useless to form
the class Spotted, since we can make no true universal
affirmative propositions with regard to it. We cannot
say that all Spotted are anything else. There are other
qualities which belong only to a number of kinds, all
of which kinds have several other attributes in common;
each one of these latter attributes extending beyond all
the kinds to which the former quality belongs, but ex-
tending in a different direction from any of the rest. Sup-


Qualities useful for the formation of Classes. 57
pose, for instance, that it be true that all animals which
chew the cud show the further phenomena of absence
of canine teeth and the presence of a prehensile tail,
whereas each of these latter attributes belongs also to
several other kinds, but not to the same in the two
cases; then will the attribute of rumination form a more
convenient link for tying together the several natural
kinds into one artificial class than either of the other
two. We can say All Ruminants have prehensile tails,
and again All Ruminants lack canine teeth, but we
cannot, from the evidence before us, make any universal
proposition which shall be true either of all animals
with prehensile tails or of all animals which lack canine
teeth. Those attributes which, by reason of their being
as it were the sign of the presence of other attributes,
have been used as connecting links to tie up artificial
classes, give rise to two substantives and an adjective or
participle. The adjective is the word used in describing
some given thing or class as possessed of the quality, as
we say a breathing man, the one substantive the name
of the quality, as 'breath,' the other the name of the
artificial class whereof each member possesses the
quality, as 'animal.' Those qualities which are signs
of no other qualities give rise only to the substantive
which is their name, and the adjective which connotes
the possession of them. In many cases, as in that of
the term Ruminant, the adjective and the artificial class-


58
A Discourse on Truth.
name are the same in form, but in use they are essen-
tially different words.
I know not whether I may make my statement clearer
to any by the use of symbols, yet as this matter seems
to me of importance I must omit no means which may
in any way serve to render my meaning apparent. Sup-
pose, then, that all the natural kinds ABC have the
attribute P, while all the kinds A B C E have the
attribute Q, and all the kinds A B C F G have the
attribute R. Then in virtue of the possession of the
attribute P, we may call every member of the three
kinds ABC, and we might similarly concoct two
names, q and r, representing the possession of the attri-
butes Q and R respectively. Now we can say truly that
'all p is q,' and 'all p is r,' but we cannot say either
'all q is p,' nor 'all q is r,' nor again, 'all r is p,'
nor all 'r is q.' P, therefore, is a fit quality for making
an artificial class, while Q and R, as far as we can see,
are not so fitted. Therefore either p will have to be
used both as substantive and adjective, e. g., Ruminant,
or a new substantive will have to be formed which shall
be shorthand symbol for each of the different members
of the class separately. The other two attributes, Q and
R, will remain adjectives, neither will any substantive be
formed connoting the possession of q or r.
We have seen that these artificial class-names are
formed upon the possession of some attribute, and so


Meaning of General Names. 59
far as they have a meaning at all, imply the possession
of that attribute. But since I cannot think of the pos-
session of anything except in reference to its possessors,
the use of such general terms necessarily refers me to
the individual Natural Kinds which I know to possess
the attribute, and it is upon this function of referring
me to the Natural Kinds, and not upon their more
apparent purpose of suggesting an attribute, that the
whole importance of these artificial general terms
depends. So much is this the case that after a time we
entirely lose sight of the attribute on which the name
was founded, and think only of the kinds which it binds
together. Who thinks of the phenomena of breathing
when he is talking about animals? From this observa-
tion we shall easily pass to another which will show yet
more clearly how curiously conventional the greater
portion of our language is; conventional not merely in
the sense that the words are arbitrary signs for ideas (for
that of course they must needs be), but in the further
peculiarity that many of these profess to represent an
idea which is absolutely inapplicable to a great portion
of the things to which they are ordinarily and quite
properly (considered as artificial class-names) applied.
Let us take our old illustration—the word Animal.
That the phenomenon of breathing, that is, the rejection
of carbonic acid gas and the taking in of oxygen, by
means of the action of the lungs, was common to Man


6o A Discourse on Truth.
with the ox, the horse, and most known living creatures
must early have been observed. Mankind thus in their
infancy formed the habit of using the word animal,
which, if it means anything, is equal to breathing-thing,
as an artificial link for binding together all the Natural
Kinds which were possessed of the complex mass ot
varying qualities which we call Life. As time went on,
many other species of creatures were discovered which
had so many points of resemblance with acknowledged
animals that they could be more conveniently classed
with them than with aught else, yet had not the special
quality of breathing by means of the lungs which the
word Animal properly connoted. A choice now lay open
to mankind. They might either form a new word to tie
up together into a larger class these newly-observed
specimens and the already known animals, or they
might arbitrarily extend the use of the word Animal to
cover these new specimens, although it was well known
that the quality from which the word originated belonged
not to them. Those languages which are derived from
the Latin adopt the latter alternative, and we accord-
ingly use habitually, as a name for an extended class, a
word, which, in so far as it has any meaning in itself
other than as an arbitrary mark for tying a number of
kinds together, is absolutely deceptive.
Luckily, as we have seen, no one ever does think of
breathing when he talks of animals, and therefore scien-


Arbitrary Extension of Use.
61
tific men are left free to settle any definition they may
think most convenient for the whole artificial class,
utterly untrammelled by any association which the word
itself might naturally suggest. In many instances, and
perhaps in the one before us, some such course as this is
absolutely necessary.
Suppose, for instance, that two, three, or more very
important attributes are common to a certain number
of natural kinds. Further, that each of these attributes
taken separately belongs to a considerably larger
number of kinds, and that the extension of each one
of them into adjacent kinds is in a different direction
from that of each of the others. Now, obviously,
it would be very convenient if we could make an
artificial class comprising all the kinds to which all
these attributes belong, since there would be several
important universal propositions which we could truly
state about each of them. But it may be, and often is,
the case that there is no one attribute which belongs to
all the natural kinds, and to these only, so that we have
no material ready to hand out of which to form a name
for our projected class. It clearly will not do to take
any one of the attributes which are conjoined in the
kinds which we wish to connect, since by our suppo-
sition each one of these attributes belongs also to a
certain number of natural kinds which have none of the
other attributes. Therefore no true proposition can be


62
A Discourse on Truth.
stated in universal form with regard to the presence or
absence of each of the remaining attributes in each
member of a class which is named by virtue of pos-
session of any one of them.
Obviously, one way out of the difficulty is to take
some attribute which is common to most of the kinds
which have the attributes we have noticed, and which,
moreover, belongs to no other kinds. We may, then,
without danger extend the use of the class-name thus
formed to a few adjacent kinds which have not indeed
the attribute which nominally forms the connecting
link between the kinds and binds them into a class, but
which have all the other attributes which are combined
in these latter kinds. In this case all the universal
propositions which we can formulate of the artificial
class in the narrower and more proper sense, as con-
taining only those kinds which have the attribute which
gives rise to the name, will be equally true of the class
in the wider sense as including those natural kinds
which, though resembling in the possession of several
common attributes, have not the special attribute in
question. The improper use of the name is a matter
of small importance, since as we have seen that name
soon comes to suggest to us, not the attribute on which
it was founded but merely some or all of the classes
which it ties together.
Symbolically. Let attribute P belong to kinds ABC


Convenience of this Extension.
63
D E F G; let Q belong to A B C D E H I; let R
belong to A B C D E K L. Then we should call
as before those kinds which have P, p; those which
have Q, q; and those which have R, r. But neither
p, q, nor r will form convenient artificial classes, since
we cannot say either that all p is q, nor all q is p, and
so with the rest. Suppose now that there is an attri-
bute S which belongs to A B C, and to those only, then it
is obvious that if we call A B C, s, because they possess
in common the attribute S, then s will so far be a con-
venient artificial class that we shall be able to make at
least three true universal propositions with regard to it.
We can say All s is p, All s is q, and All s is r. But
P Q R may also be truly attributed to D and E, which
do not properly belong to the class s, since they have
not the attribute S, on which that class is constructed.
If however, we arbitrarily extend the use of the name
to kinds D and E, we shall still be able to make the same
three true universal propositions as before with regard
to this extended class. This I apprehend we do more
frequently than is ordinarily imagined, though, as in
our original instance, the process of the extension of
the use of the term is usually gradual and unperceived,
as new kinds are one by one discovered which have a
number of qualities in common with all the members of
an already existent artificial class, but have not that
special quality which gave a name to the class.


64
A Discourse on Truth.
But that this method of forming an artificial class is
both clumsy and unscientific must at once be granted.
Men of science have accordingly been loath to resort
to it, and whensoever they have had any hand in the
formation of an artificial class, have adopted another
expedient, which although quite as artificial as that
which we have just been talking of, has this not
extremely important advantage, that it avoids a some-
what improper use of language. Their procedure is on
this wise.
Every ideal picture of a kind or individual consists of
a number of parts which unite to form one complex
notion, but which as they are themselves different are
capable of receiving separate names and frequently do
receive them. Thus my ideal picture of a man com-
prises a trunk, two arms, two legs, a head, etc. Now
each of these parts has always or almost always been
seen in conjunction with the rest, therefore it is difficult
if not impossible to conceive any of them separately.
Even in those cases in which we have observed a por-
tion of the body separated from the remainder, that
portion has not really been the same to the eye that it
was before separation. Samson must have had a very
full conception of headless trunks, but the guillotine in
each case exposed to view a new and hideous picture,
and the executioner's idea of the trunks so presented to
him must have been utterly unlike that of the body as


Other Methods of forming Artificial Classes. 65
it appears while the head is still on it, even although
the idea of the head itself be kept in the background as
much as possible. The same remark applies to the sur-
geon's notion of a separate limb, or that which an
ordinary man might get by an anatomical model. It
always contains some new portion which in no way
belongs to the limb when attached to the body.
We may then admit that of the detached portion of any
whole picture of an individual or kind, we have no idea
except as conjoined with the rest of the picture. Never-
theless we have separate names for each of these
separate members, and may use these names for the
formation of artificial classes in cases where a certain
portion of the whole picture recurs in several otherwise
dissimilar kinds which we wish to connect because they
have several attributes in common, but cannot call by
a name derived from any of these common attributes,
since, as in the case which we have already discussed,
each one of the attributes belongs also to other kinds
to which none of the rest do belong. The names Quad-
ruped, Biped, and a great proportion of the terms of
botany, as Polypod, Pinnate, etc., are formed on this
principle.
Now if, as we have seen, we can form no conception
of a living and unseparate leg except as belonging to
some animal we have seen or have a notion of, it follows
necessarily that it is even less possible for us to form a
F


66
A Discourse on Truth.
mental picture of animals with four legs in general
other than that of some special animal which we know.
The name Quadruped is useful just in the same way as
Animal was in referring us back to our experience and
making us run over a list of all the four-legged animals
we have seen. Like the other general names of which
we have talked, it is merely an artificial link for tying
together classes. To put the matter for a moment in
logical phraseology, its whole value lies in its denotation,
not in its connotation.
»
We have now arrived at what I believe to be an
exhaustive list of general names of natural objects, and
have discovered that they may be divided into four
classes. They are—
(1) General Names of Natural Kinds, whereof we can
form a mental image more or less distinct.
(2) General Names of Artificial Classes which tie
together several natural kinds by means of some
attribute which they all have in common.
(3) General Names of Artificial Classes which tie
together natural kinds by means of an attribute
which belongs to the greater portion of those
kinds, the name derived from that attribute being
extended for convenience' sake to several kinds
which have not that attribute.
(4) Names of Artificial Classes which combine natural
kinds by means of a truncated portion of the


Definition of General Names. 67
mental picture of each of the several kinds; which
portion is common to all these kinds.
Of the definition of the first class of General Names
we have already treated. The three other classes have,
I apprehend, no natural definition; the name calls up
at the moment no image whatsoever in the mind. But
as it immediately sets us thinking to what kinds it
is properly or conventionally applicable, the proximate
though nqt immediate mental state aroused by the name
is an enumeration of the kinds which are contained in
the class. This enumeration then is that which will best
stand in the place of a definition. Since however these
classes are expressly formed for the purpose of binding
together kinds which have several other attributes in
common, it is important to mention at the time of giving
the definition what those attributes are. This forms no
portion of the definition, since except to the scientific
man the name will not usually suggest either im-
mediately or proximately these other common attri-
butes; yet seeing that the class was only formed by
reason of the concurrence of these attributes in several
kinds, he who merely gives a definition of the class
without mentioning the common possession by all its
members of some or all of these several attributes, con-
veys no knowledge of any value to his hearer.
Of the definition of the complex emotions we have
already spoken. That of activities is usually and best
f 2


68
A Discourse on Trtith.
performed by means of the mention of the successive
appearances of the agent during the various parts of
the activity and of the appearance of the result. Almost
all other words represent, not one mental picture, but
several (for instance, Justice in one sense gives us suc-
cessive pictures of a crime and its punishment). All
these are defined by being resolved into their simpler
elements—a process which often requires the greatest
skill and knowledge, but which involves no new general
principles.


CHAPTER III.
OF TRUE PROPOSITIONS.
A proposition asserts the connection or repugnancy
of our ideas. A true proposition in the fullest sense
asserts such a connection of ideas as is in accordance
with our past experience.
Now ideas may be connected in such a sort as to
form one complex mental picture. Every one of these
ideas will appear simultaneous with the rest and be
indissolubly connected with them. We may form pro-
positions then asserting this simultaneity of ideas, or
we may break up the whole picture into the simpler
elements of which it is composed. Thus we may say
Gold is yellow, and gold is shining. Such propositions
which separate off portions of a complex mental state
and use those portions as the predicate of the name
of the state, that is, affirm one or more elements
of the picture to be true of the picture as a whole, are
called Analytic. The most important of such analytic
propositions are Definitions of which we treated in the
last chapter, and which affirm the sum of the separable


7o
A Discourse on Truth.
elements to be true of the mental state or picture treated
as a whole, e.g., the Skye terrier is from four to six inches
high and from twelve to fourteen long, it is usually either
grey or blue-black with dropping ears, and long silky
hair, which in perfect specimens altogether covers the
eyes.
But by far the larger and more important part of our
communication of knowledge to each other consists not
in the mere description of things, but rather in the state-
ment of some more or less obscure attribute which we
have discovered or heard of, and which seems important
to the happiness or comfort of the Human Race; as for
instance, that morphia injected into the veins produces
sleep, or that the rapid evaporation of water from the
surface of a champagne bottle in a hot sun will cool
the wine within. Now an attribute, as we have seen
already, is some quality of the thing which forms not
part of our first experience, nor is invariably present to
our senses whenever that thing lies before us, but which
we have had experience of whenever that thing was
placed in a certain definite relation to us. Nettles have
the attribute of stinging, but only they are made pain-
fully aware of this attribute who incautiously and lightly
place their hands upon them. We probably have each
of us personally made discovery of this attribute at least
two or three times in our life, but no one has repeated
this experience as often as once for every thousand times


Analytic and Synthetic Propositions. 71
that he has seen a nettle. It follows then, as we said
before, that when the name of anything is mentioned,
the notion of its attributes arises not at once in the
mind, but merely that of its appearance. The several
ideas of its attributes come after in irregular order and
number according to the varieties of the experience and
reading of each individual.
Propositions which assert the possession by anything
of a given attribute, or more generally the connection
of two ideas which are not simultaneous, but succeed
each other in the mind after a more or less appreciable
interval, we call Synthetic. Ninety-nine sentences out
of every hundred which we use in conveying knowledge
of any kind to our fellowmen are Synthetic propositions.
In this chapter we shall confine our attention exclu-
sively to this latter class, and shall enquire how far the
forms of proposition ordinarily in vogue are fitted to
convey true and accurate information from man to man.
We must first, however, hark back over some of the
country we have already passed through, if haply we
may thus get a fuller scent of our quarry.
We have said more than once before, that a true pro-
position is that which arouses in another the same state
of mind as that of the speaker himself, with the further
proviso that that state of mind exactly represents the
speaker's experience (that is, that there is in him no
abnormal failure of memory, nor vagary of fancy).


72
A Discourse on Truth.
But even as that would be but a poor copy of a picture,
which exactly reproduced the colours but neglected
entirely to observe whether they respectively occupied
the same space and were brought out into the same
comparative prominence as those of the original; so is
that a poor verbal representation of the state of our
mind which merely states that we have certain ideas
therein, but omits altogether to mention which is the
most vivid and important, and how they lie with respect
to each other. Now in giving a definition of any natu-
ral kind, a subject which I have investigated at a length
which I fear must have reached the extreme verge of
my reader's patience, we saw that all the less constant
and less marked parts of the picture were excluded alto-
gether, and there remained the description of a limited
number of ideas which appeared conjointly on every
occasion of our experience of the object, and which
therefore would be represented in the mind by ideas
which would be equally vivid but for differences in the
relative size and importance of those parts of the thing
they respectively represent. These differences may be
made apparent by the definition itself (as when we say that
the legs of the Skye terrier are short and those of the
greyhound long); so that we may contentedly conclude
that in this case speech fulfils satisfactorily the task im-
posed upon it, and that the mind of the hearer may be
made by a careful definition satisfactorily to reflect that


Vagueness of Synthetic Propositions. 73
of the speaker. But with Synthetic propositions the
case is far otherwise.
In order that I may know in what relation a thing
and its attribute stand to each other in the mind of any
other person, I must not only form proper notions both
of the thing and the attribute, but I must also be able
to appreciate in some way the ease and rapidity with
which the notion of the attribute follows in his mind
that of the thing. If he tells me that such or such a
dog is savage, I am yet far from knowing how closely
the image of the dog is connected in his mind with the
notion of attempts to bite. This connection will be the
result of his experience, and it is that experience which
it concerns me to share. At present I have merely a
vague idea that on certain occasions (number and at-
tendant circumstances unknown) the dog has attempted
to bite people, but what will be the chance (as repre-
sented by the experience of my friend) of the beast's
flying at me if I enter the yard, I have little means of
estimating. In this especial instance my fears will
probably induce me to put a very high estimate on the
closeness of the connection, in my friend's mind, be-
tween the idea of the dog, and that of his attacking
people. The same exaggeration is often produced by
hope, with regard to pleasurable attributes.
Nor is the matter at all improved if, instead of state-
ments about individuals, we take general truths about


74
A Discourse on Truth.
kinds. That all Tigers are savage, and all Wolves are
savage, are both indisputable, or at least sufficiently
accurate, statements, and the word 'savage' may be
used with precisely the same meaning in both, that is,
as equivalent to 'prone to attack man,' yet before either
proposition can convey any thought to me, I must attri-
bute some definite strength of connection to the two
ideas contained in that proposition; I must imagine the
rapidity and ease with which my informant passes from
the idea Tiger, to that of attacking man, and so too
from the idea Wolf to the same attribute. Now, if I
attribute an equal strength to the connection in each
of the two cases, I shall obviously be mistaken, since
wolves require a much stronger incentive to attack man
than tigers do; yet there is nothing in the form of the
two propositions to induce me to make any distinction
between them.
Other things being equal, the rapidity with which I
pass from the idea of a thing to that of any one of its
attributes, is in exact proportion to the number of times
that the experience of the thing has been followed by
the experience of the attribute. We may put the same
statement another way, and say that our expectation of
the presence of the attribute, when we encounter the
thing, is in exact proportion to the number of cases
when we have already followed that order of sensation
of which we have at this moment got the first member.


The Nature of Expectation.
75
The mind passes on either from the perception of a
thing to the idea of some attribute which has frequently-
been observed to belong to the thing, or from the mere
idea of the thing to the idea of that same attribute.
It is possible that the passage of thought from sensa-
tion to idea which constitutes expectation, is much more
rapid than that from idea to idea, which is represented,
or sought to be represented by propositions. But the
rapidities, if not equal, are at all events proportional to
each other; a more vivid expectation of the attribute on
the sensation of the thing, corresponds with a closer
connection between the idea of the thing and that of the
attribute. The two mental sequences owe their origin
and force to the same cause, the frequency of the con-
nection of the sensations. They will, therefore, neces-
sarily both wax and wane together.
If we have noticed instances where the thing being
presented to our senses, and all other conditions being
apparently the same, the supposed attribute did not
follow, our expectation of its occurrence at any future
occasion when we perceive the thing will be lessened,
and if there be several such cases of failure of the
appearance of the attribute, our expectation of its
presence or absence when we see the thing, will be the
result of the balancing together of the positive and
negative instances, supposing always that no single
instance is so closely connected with any strong


76
A Discourse on Truth.
emotion, as to count for more than its real value. It
follows from what we have already said, that the con-
nection of the idea of the thing, with that of the quality
or attribute, will also be in accordance with this
balancing process.
If, now, there be any natural kind, of which and of
whose attributes I have a sufficiently full experience,
and I am speaking to another person whose experience
has been similar to mine, but whose memory I wish to
refresh, or whose attention I wish to fix on a given
point, what form of proposition shall I most naturally
use? It seems clear that the simple mention of the
names of the thing and the attribute will suggest in his
mind a connection between the two exactly like that
which exists in mine, our experiences being similar.
I shall say to him, 'You know that Dons are priggish,'
or 'You are aware that sheep are liable to the foot and
mouth disease,' and shall feel confident that within
narrow limits, the closeness of connection between the
subject and predicate in the two sentences respectively,
will appear to him much as it does to me. It is true
that I might with accuracy prefix the word 'all' to the
latter proposition, and it is to be hoped that I could not
properly do the like to the former, but the addition or
omission of this word will in no way help or hinder his
understanding of my statement, while it is itself open
to grave difficulties, with which I shall deal more fully


Indesignate Propositions.
77
hereafter. The form which seems most proper to use
in such cases is that which I have adopted, and which
is almost invariably employed by sensible men in the
common transactions of life, when speaking of affairs
with which their audience are already acquainted. It
is true that logicians have branded this form of propo-
sition with the terrific epithet 'Indesignate,' and warn
us all never to use it under penalty of their severest
displeasure. But not all that the logicians reject is
chaff, neither is all that they accept corn.
Yet, after all, the advance we have made is but a little
one, and moreover is hardly in the direct line of our
enquiry. The statements which we have noticed are not
intended for, nor capable of, the communication of know-
ledge; they merely serve for its revival and excitement.
Knowledge is only then communicated when the
speaker brings into the mind of his hearer a conjunction
of ideas different from any which existed there before.
Our task is to enquire how far it is possible for one per-
son to arouse in another a state of mind corresponding
to his own, when that other has not himself had the
sensations described in that especial order which the
speaker wishes to arouse.
Imagine, then, that a friend tells me that 'The
Ostrich in the Desert lays her eggs in the sand.' Now
I may have a perfectly accurate notion of the ostrich; I
may' either have seen it in some zoological collection,


78
A Discourse on Truth.
or have studied pictures of it; or, at worst, my friend's
description of it may have been so full as to enable me
to construct a tolerably accurate mental image of the
bird. I have in all probability seen ostrich eggs, and
can easily conceive them lying upon the sand, but as I
have never had the opportunity of observing the ostrich
nor of finding its eggs in the sand, I know not how
closely these two observations are connected. I have
no natural tendency before hearing the statement to
pass from the notion of the ostrich to that of the eggs
in the sand, nor can I at all estimate how strong is
that tendency in my friend's mind; with what degree of
ease and rapidity he passes from one mental picture to
the other. Yet it is this knowledge which it is all-im-
portant for me to possess.
If my friend's knowledge were entirely derived from
his own experience; if the ostrich had been an entirely
unknown bird until he travelled through the desert, his
best chance of making me fully understand his state of
mind as attempted to be expressed by this proposition,
would probably be to inform me directly of the amount
and nature of the experience upon which this conjunc-
tion of ideas was founded. He would tell me, 'I have
found ostrich-eggs in the desert so many times, and
in each of these instances, or in a certain proportion of
these instances, I have noticed that these eggs were
placed in the sand.'


Propositions conveying new Knowledge. 79
Of course, in order that his experience should have
any value, there must in each instance be ample oppor-
tunities for the bird to lay its eggs elsewhere than in
sand, on rocks, etc. If he had only met the ostrich in
absolutely sandy deserts, the notion of living in sand
would form part of the picture of the ostrich (at least as
a necessary background), and the proposition would
become, 'the ostrich which lives amongst sand lays its
eggs amongst sand,' and would really only be synthetic
as far as concerned the statement that the ostrich lays
eggs, since the notion of pervading sand would form
part of the original picture of the ostrich, and would not
be an attribute or subsequent sensation to which the
mind would be carried on after an interval by the men
tion of the name.
I should then take the positive instances to represent
a rapidity of mental transition in proportion to their
number, and the negative instances (if any) to weaken
and retard this transition in similar proportion.
But against my informant's adopting this course in
practice there are strong objections. In the first place,
he is probably by no means the only observer of the
ostrich, and the connection in his mind between the
idea of the bird and that of the eggs laid in the sand,
is the result not only of his own experience but of
accounts of other travellers which he has heard and
read, and it is this net result which he is anxious to


8o
A Discourse on Truth.
impart to me. Secondly, the number of experiences
which he himself has had is likely to be so great that
he cannot exactly remember the number of instances
either positive or negative. This will clearly be the case
when he is talking of a matter of daily observation, as
that the sun in India is more distressing when shining
through clouds.
In all such cases he is obliged to resort to another
and far less satisfactory method of communicating his
thought. He gives up all attempt at communicating
to me the positive and most important element upon
which the connection of ideas rests, to wit, the amount
of the experience, the number of times that the sensa-
tions have been conjoined. He is content to impart
as far as he can the negative element in the formation
of the mental connection. I mean the occurrence or
non-occurrence of contradictory instances; where all
other things remaining the same, the experience repre-
sented by the first idea has not been followed by that
represented by the second. If there has been no contra-
dictory instance in the experience of himself or others,
he says (to return to our former instance), 'All ostriches
lay their eggs in sand;' if there have been contra-
dictory instances, he says, 'Some ostriches lay their
eggs in sand.'
Let us now examine closely how much information he
has imparted to us by either of these sentences. We


Universal Propositions.
81
will begin with the former and more promising of the
two, the universal proposition, 'All ostriches, etc'
How far on hearing these words can I simulate in my-
self my informant's mental condition? I begin hope-
fully; I form separately the two conceptions of the
ostrich and the eggs in sand, and attempt to bring them
together and establish a connection of a certain force
between them. But of what force is this connection to
be? If my friend's experience and that of his in-
formants be small, the connection will be weak and the
passage of the mind slow, and it may vary through all
degrees of rapidity and strength. His words, however,
have given me no information on this point; he merely
tells me that he knows of no contradictory instance-
His information as it stands is really about as valuable
as that of one who should tell us that there was nought
to be deducted from a sum of money which he would
pay us for a piece of work, but should altogether abstain
from informing us what that sum of money was.
But supposing my friend's information to be given
with regard to some point which will directly or in-
directly affect my welfare, I am naturally anxious to
make something definite out of it. Moreover I have a
natural abhorrence of doubt. This abhorrence is easily
explicable. The ultimate object of all knowledge and
all enquiry is action—such action as will sustain the
lives and maintain and increase the happiness of our-
G


82
A Discourse on Truth.
selves and those dear to us. Now this life and this
happiness, as both physiologists and theologists are
agreed, consist in bringing ourselves into accordance
with our circumstances. If, then, one phaenomenon be
given us as a sign of the approach of another pha-
e-
nomenon, for which it behoves us to put ourselves in
preparation—if the rapid fall of the barometer betokens
a storm—he will live best and most naturally, and will
be most able to provide happiness for his friends, who is
ever on the alert for these natural signs—passes rapidly
in thought from the sign to the coming event which it
betokens, and prepares himself most suitably for that
event. Now doubt is the slow and difficult passage of
mind between two ideas. He who doubts acts not at
all, or acts tardily,' and the event which he should have
foreseen and guarded against overtakes him utterly un-
guarded, or in the midst of his unfinished preparations.
'Who doubts is lost,' is in many instances Nature's law
as truly as it is that of any Church.
But although this abhorrence of doubt is historically
and in the long-run of most beneficial tendency, yet in
certain instances, and specially in that which we are now
considering, it frequently betrays us into the most
grievous errors. Let us see how it will act upon us in
the case before us.
My informant has made a statement to me which I
am anxious to put into such terms as may make it most


A bhorrence of Doubt.
83
useful for my guidance in the affairs of life. Now if I
suppose that his experience of the two phaenomena has
been very wide, it will follow that, since (as I know) there
are no negative instances, the connection between the
two ideas will be very close, that is, that he will pass
very quickly from the one to the other, there will be an
entire absence of all doubt, and he will act quickly and
with decision in cases where action is called for. This
would obviously be the most desirable state of mind to
be in supposing that it were warranted by experience.
I therefore, arbitrarily assume a very wide experience on
the part of my friend and his informants, and a very
close consequent connection between the phaenomena.
Moreover, in my absolute absence of information as
to the comparative strength of different mental con-
nections which are described in the same form, I am
forced either to suppose that all are of the same close-
ness or to allot the degrees of closeness in the different
cases at the dictates of pure fancy. Yet from all we
have said it is clear that in the original observers the
connections between the ideas of divers sets of phae-
nomena will vary very greatly in strength. The same
man might tell us that 'all sharks live in water, and
that all ostriches lay their eggs in sand,' but he would
be considerably more surprised if he saw a shark moving
quietly and comfortably about on dry land than if he
saw an ostrich deposit its eggs on a rock. Now surprise


84
A Discourse on Truth.
is the shock occasioned by the experience of an order
of phaenomena which is in contradiction to a connection
hitherto observed and established in the mind, and is in
exact proportion to the strength of that mental connec-
tion. We on the other hand, supposing that we had
absolutely no knowledge of the phaenomena in question
except that which had been furnished us by our friend's
words, should regard the walking shark and the egg
lying upon the rock with an exactly equal amount of
astonishment—a result which proves that his use of the
doubtful or rather negative word 'all,' and our arbitrary
interpretation thereof, had not enabled us in any suf-
ficient fashion to imitate his state of mind with regard
to the phaenomena.
Suppose that having heard from a traveller one of
these accurate but vague general statements as to
some animal, say the ostrich, I am placed in circum-
stances where knowledge of the habits of the bird
is important to me, I shall probably accept his state-
ment as implying a very close connection between
the thing and the attribute—the bird and the laying
eggs in the sand. If I lack other food I shall explore
most carefully wide tracts of desert, omitting of set pur-
pose all investigation of tracts of rock, or even of
herbage, and I may thus chance to miss the eggs on
which my life depends, and which, breaking the most
common wont of its race, the ostrich has in this instance


Arbitrary Interpretation of Propositions. 85
deposited in those neglected spots. Our original in-
formant, whose expectation of finding the eggs in the
sand was determined directly by his experience, and
was therefore in this instance small, would doubtless
after his first fruitless search in the sand have turned to
explore the remaining spots, and would have found that
which he sought. Yet his information, which was the
best which he could give us, by reason of our interpre-
tation of it, will have frustrated the great end of all
information, the preservation of life.
Nay, cry the logicians, it was his information and
not the interpretation which was at fault. He had no
right to make the general and sweeping assertion on
such a small amount of evidence. He should merely
have said that in the experience of himself and his
informants, the occurrence was invariable. What, I
ask, does the word All signify more than an invariable
experience of eye-witnesses? You answer that it asserts
further that all future cases will conform to this rule.
That it asserts (or rather suggests) an expectation of
future occurrence of similar experience I willingly admit;
in fact, the observation necessarily follows from our
analysis of expectation. But that it can assert anything
more than expectation of a greater or less degree with
regard to a future which is not yet but is to be, I
absolutely deny.
On this matter I shall have much more to say anon.


86 A Discourse on Truth.
»
But, assuming my statement granted, that every pro-
position which states an experience may also suggest
an expectation, we can, I think, solve the question of
the proper use of the word 'All.' For since expectation
is the passage of the mind from a sensation to an idea,
expectations can only vary in the rapidity of the pas-
sage. Now, this rapidity passes through all stages, from
the electric quickness which we call certainty, to the
slow and hesitating progress which is Doubt. The
greatest rapidity is the result of extensive and uncon-
tradicted experience; the extreme of Doubt is reached
when the confirmatory and contradictory experiences
nearly balance each other. Between these two extreme
points there is a gradual ascent, with no definite break
or halting-place.
It is not even necessarily the case that an uncontra-
dicted experience creates a stronger expectation than
any contradicted one. My expectation that this shilling
which I hold in my hand will pass current is stronger
than the expectation that I shall see to-day pass before
my window the same old couple who have passed
every day since I have been here. The former, how-
ever, is a contradicted experience, since I have met with
bad coin in my life whose spurious nature I have failed
to detect till I attempted to change them; the latter is
an absolutely uncontradicted one. After deducting,
however, the negative instances of bad coin from the


Proper use of the prefix All.
87
positive ones of good, the balance of experience, and
therefore of expectation, remains far stronger in favour
of the shilling being good than that which arises from
the uncontradicted experience of the daily passing
couple.
Since then there is no definite amount of expecta-
tion which will warrant the use of the word 'All,'
for every proposition which suggests that amount,
and forbids its employment for such statements as are
intended to convey a less amount of expectation, we
must look elsewhere for some distinction which will
enable us to justify the use and rejection in the respec-
tive cases of this universal prefix (all). I can find it only
in the quality of the experience, that is, in the fact of its
being or not being uncontradicted. For all uncontra-
dicted experience, whatsoever its amount, I prefix the
term 'All' to the statement of that experience, for all
contradicted experience I omit it. I affirm that all
ordinary men unskilled in the niceties of Logic do the
like.
But since, as we have seen, mankind are prone to
affix a very high estimate to the amount of the expe-
rience represented by the universal proposition; it is
but natural that when the experience is really of a low
amount they should expect to be warned of the fact,
and thus saved from those errors into which their eager
disposition is apt to lead them. When the universal


83
A Discourse on Truth.
proposition represents an experience which, though un-
contradicted, yet consists of a small number of instances,
it behoves our informant to declare that this is so. If
he do not we shall be sure to pitch our expectation far
higher than his experience warrants. This is the real
meaning of those warnings against rash generalization
with which the books of logicians and men of science
abound. The warning, however, should rather be
against rash expectation, and should be addressed to
the hearers rather than to the speakers. If once men
would get firmly fixed in their minds the fact that
the word 'All,' if it is to have any definite meaning
whatsoever, can only state the absence of contradiction,
and in no way the amount of experience; they would
in every case, when they heard any universal statement
of whose evidence they were in doubt, closely examine
the speaker as to the number of times that he or others
had met with the experience in question, and as nearly
as may be adjust their expectation to the information
thus obtained.
It is this purely negative meaning of the word 'All'
and the arbitrary positive value which men attach to it,
that gives such overwhelming weight to the Negative
Instance. Bacon long ago pointed out that any uni-
versal proposition was absolutely overthrown by the
experience of a single case in which the expectation
failed, and the statement proved untrue. But he failed to


The Negative Instance.
89
point out the reason of this total downfall, neither could
he have succeeded in discovering it without some such
laborious analysis of the meaning of the word 'All' as
that through which we have waded.
Let us consider for a moment the state of mind of a
man who, having had heretofore little or no experience
of any given thing, suddenly meets with an attribute
of this thing contradictory to some universal proposition
which he has received from others. Having learnt that
all tigers are savage, he comes across a perfectly tame
tiger in a wild beast show. Now if he had himself
before met with a number of savage tigers, or knew
roughly how wide was the experience of his informants,
the effect of this new experience on him would not be
very great, the contradictory experience would have to
be deducted from the sum of affirmatory experiences,
and his expectation that the next tiger which he might
see would be savage would be less, but not very much
less, than it had been before his meeting with the tame
tiger. But he is in no such enviable position; he has
supposed beforehand (and in this case rightly supposed)
that the evidence on which the universal proposition
was founded was very great; but has formed no very
definite notion of its amount. When the contradictory
experience comes he is therefore totally unable to com-
pare this one experience with the large number of
experiences on the other side. He begins to suspect
/


90
A Discourse on Truth.
that perhaps after all, the instances when his in-
formants, and those from whom they have got their
knowledge, have seen a tiger are very few, and that the
proportion between these instances and the negative
instances, of which he has experienced one, is not one
of great inequality. He is thrown at once from the
height of fancied certainty into the abyss of doubt.
Great then is the power of the Negative Instance, and
great must it ever be, while language remains such an
imperfect instrument for the conveyance of thought.
It was to obviate this danger that Bacon invented
that celebrated Scientific Induction which was to take the
place of the old method of enumeration of instances,
and lie high above the reach of the onslaughts of the
all-destructive Negative Instance. This induction vari-
ously improved (?) and systematized, is that which now
occupies the Schools; but as it concerns itself chiefly
with the discovery of causes rather than with the obser-
vation of attributes, it may be most conveniently dealt
with when we have discovered the nature of a cause and
the pretended law of Universal Causation. Meanwhile
we may contentedly assume that, subject to any dis-
covery which we may afterwards make as to the sovran
virtues of the New Induction, no universal proposition
taken by itself and without further knowledge on the
part of the hearer, can enable him to represent to himself
the state of mind of the speaker.


Particular Propositions.
91
We have now to deal with that second class of pro-
positions which do not even assert that the experience
of the speaker has been uncontradicted, and examine
how much information is to' be got out of them by the
hearer. We saw that Universal Propositions only gave
us one of the two elements required to form an expecta-
tion, to wit, the absence of contradiction, omitting the
other and perhaps more important element—the amount
of the experience. We shall find, I fear, that these
other propositions with which we are now concerned
give us neither of the two required elements. As the
word 'All' was the sign of uncontradicted experience,
so is the word 'Some' of contradicted experience.
Whenever I assert that some A is B, I mean to convey
to my hearer the belief that there have been cases in
which A's have shown the quality expressed by B, and
that there have been, or at least that I expect there have
been, cases in which A's have not shown that quality.
In this statement, as in many others, I am at variance
with the ordinary Logic books, but I appeal to the con-
sciousness of the plain and candid man uneorrupted
by having his thoughts forced through a mould, to
confirm the truth of these and all other of my state-
ments. At all events I am in accordance with the Logic
books in calling all those propositions in which the
word 'Some' occurs 'Particular.'
Let us take, then, any Particular proposition, such as


92
A Discourse on Truth.
this, 'Some camels can perform a march of a hundred
miles in a day.' This informs me that in the narrator's
experience there have occurred cases in which a camel
has been seen to do a hundred miles in the day, and
beyond this it asserts, or at least suggests, that he has
met with camels which are incapable of achieving such
a feat. The statement gives no information whatever
as to the proportion between the two classes of camels.
Now suppose having heard this statement, I meet
with a particular camel, in what respect is my know-
ledge of him increased by what I have heard, or what
expectation shall I form of him in consequence? My
narrator's statement may have meant that one hundred
out of every hundred and one camels could march a
hundred miles a day; or again, it may have meant that
only one in a hundred could do so. There is nothing in
the words to suggest either one thing or the other. It is
true that as a matter of fact I should extract some expec-
tation out of the words, but I should do so either by
means of previous knowledge or by that of illegitimate
assumptions. Suppose, for instance, I had before met
with and heard of no camels which could do more than
sixty miles a day; the statement would destroy the
expectation that sixty miles would be the maximum
limit of any particular camel's daily journey, and would
prevent me from feeling great surprise if it performed
eighty or ninety miles, but it would enable me to form


Their Imperfections.
93
no legitimate expectation as to the chance of its doing
so. Again, I probably know or assume that there is not
any very great difference between the paces of different
animals of the same species, and combining this know-
ledge with my informant's statement, I assume that if
camels have done a hundred miles a day I may safely
expect that the one before me will be able to cover fifty.
Yet, if having heard that some horses could go at the
rate of thirty miles per hour, I should expect to get
fifteen out of a cart-horse, I should doubtless meet with
a grievous disappointment.
This at least we may say, that except as qualifying
or supplementing a universal proposition, particular
propositions are of no avail for the communication of
knowledge. I believe, however, that in practice we
usually limit the use of the word 'Some' to proposi-
tions where the positive experience falls short of, or
at least does not exceed, the contradictory instances,
employing by preference the more explicit word 'Most,'
for cases in which there is a clear preponderance |of
confirmatory experience. If this usage were universal
we should have two classes of particular propositions,
the one of which would have the affix Some the other
the affix 'Most.' The former would represent cases where
the balance of the experience was negative, and where
we should, therefore, rather expect the absence of the
attribute than its presence. In the latter class the


94 A Discourse on Truth.
balance of experience would be positive, and we should
expect, though with varying degrees of assurance, the
presence of the attribute. Both classes of propositions
would be liable to the objection that they gave us no
knowledge of the absolute amount of the balance of
experience in each case, but this drawback they would
share with Universal propositions. Since, however, the
ordinary usage of mankind is not quite fixed on this
point, a new and easily avoidable element of confusion
is introduced by the use of the word 'Some.' 'Most'
is unobjectionable from this point of view, since it
clearly means more than half or a balance of experience
on one side. We require an equally definite word for
less than half or a balance of experience on the other
side. 'Some,' of course, would serve admirably for this
purpose were it consistently employed in this sense
only.
If the course of reasoning which we have followed
throughout this chapter be conclusive, we must draw
the necessary consequence that no meaning whatsoever
can be assigned to such expressions as Absolute Cer-
tainty, Immutable Truth, etc. A mental proposition
may no doubt be absolutely true, so long as it refers
only to my experience and accurately represents that
experience. So long, that is, as my faculties of memory
and sensation are in perfect working order, and I pay
due attention to their reports. But the moment I


Certainty.
95
attempt to put this mental proposition into words, or to
conceive to myself the exact value of some statement of
another, all this possibility of accuracy vanishes away.
I must be content if I can make my hearer's mind cor-
respond to mine in the roughest and vaguest manner,
and after like sort must I hope to attune myself to the
mental state of any of my informants. Absolute uni-
formity I can never hope to attain.
Yet again, Truth is chiefly if not solely valuable in
relation to expectation. I wish to represent to myself
the nature of the conjunction of two ideas in my in-
formant's mind, in order that, when the sensation of
the thing, which the first idea represents, is brought
before my consciousness, my expectation of the appear-
ance of the attribute which the second idea represents
may be as strong and no stronger than that of my in-
formant would be under similar circumstances. Now
strength of expectation and rapidity of passage from
sensation to idea, or from one idea to the other are, as
we have already seen, but two sides of the same thing.
Since then, there is no meaning to be attached to the
words absolute strength or absolute quickness, neither is
there any signification whatever in the phrase, Absolute
Certainty. Certainty is extremely quick progress from
one idea to another (or from sensation to idea), so that
'absolute certainty' can mean nothing more than abso-
lute quickness, that is, can mean nought whatsoever.


96
A Discourse on Truth.
-
That there are degrees of certainty even in cases where
the word 'certain' is ordinarily and properly used will
be fully evident by the application of that test of surprise
whereof we have already made use. A man would say
that he was certain that he had seen a friend yesterday,
and again that he was certain that if he dropped his
whip from his hand it would fall to the floor, yet his sur-
prise, if it could be proved to him that his friend had not
been in the place where he imagined that he yesterday
saw him, and that he must therefore have made a mis-
take as to the day or as to the person, would not be
nearly so great as that if he dropped his whip and saw
it suspended in the air without visible support.
When the quickness of the passage of thought between
two ideas is very great, the fact that the ideas are succes-
sive and not simultaneous, becomes scarcely discoverable,
and the time occupied in passing from one to the other
being infinitesimal is unnoticed. We then call the con-
nection between the two ideas certainty. But that there
are degrees in this infinitesimal time is clear from the
fact of the varying amounts of surprise in cases of frus-
tration, real or imaginary of various certainties. This
surprise is in exact proportion to the amount of the ex-
pectation or quickness in the passage of thought. If
then the surprise varies, so must the respective certain-
ties, and no one of them can ever become absolute.
All that has been said as to the vague and misleading


Wide Universal Propositions.
97
character of universal and particular propositions with
regard to real natural kinds applies with tenfold force to
those propositions which make assertions of any sort
about those wide artificial classes which tie together a
number of these natural kinds. The propositions are, in
fact, mere short-hand forms for making in one sentence
a number of detached statements. My assertion that
'no quadrupeds have reason,' does not really imply an
incapacity of my mind for passing from the idea quad-
ruped to the idea rational, since in fact I have no idea
of a quadruped at all, as we have already proved.
What it does assert is, the incapacity which I feel
for passing from the idea of any kinds of quadrupeds
which I know, or have heard of, to the notion rational.
It is to be analysed into a number of separate asser-
tions of the form 'No Dogs have reason,' 'No Horses
have reason,' etc.
Now in the first place the negative universal pro-
position stands in exactly the same difficulty as the
affirmative universal. Every time that I have met
with one phaenomenon without meeting with another
increases my difficulty of passing from the idea of one
phaenomenon to that of the other, and yet the negative
proposition gives in its form no knowledge of the num-
ber of instances in experience of the absence of the
attribute. It therefore fails to impart any conception
of the difficulty of passing from the idea of the thing to


98
A Discourse on Truth.
that of the attribute—of the strength of my feeling of the
repugnancy between the two. If we take that repug-
nancy to amount to absolute impossibility of bringing
the two ideas together in thought, then we fall into the
same error which we exposed in the case of certainty.
Two ideas may be very easily conjoined, or they may
show the greatest aversion to being brought together;
but as long as the two ideas are really two and not
merely the same, or on the other hand one idea and its
negation, there can neither be absolute necessity for nor
absolute impossibility of their mental conjunction.
If we were dealing with a real simple proposition,
such as No dog is rational, this would be the whole of
Our difficulty; but in this instance which we have
chosen, we have got bound up together a number
of detached propositions, representing very various
amounts of expectation. Thus, that no horse is ra-
tional, and no pig is rational, is supported by so wide
an experience, that the difficulty of conceiving ra-
tionality as belonging to either of these beasts, rises to a
height which in rough language may very fairly be called
impossibility; but when we come to less-known kinds,
the difficulty becomes less in exact proportion to the
decreased amount of experience. I am conscious of no
equally great difficulty in attempting to conceive a
rational beaver, and little or none in imagining that the
centaur may be rational, if such an animal there might


Increased Difficulties.
be. Other little known animals I do, indeed,
as irrational, but this arises from their similarity to
some known irrational animal with which I, to a great
extent, confound them in thought. But in order that
the statement that No Quadrupeds are rational, should
convey any due impression to our minds, we must com-
bine all the separate expectations of the irrationality of
each of the separate kinds of quadrupeds. Now mathe-
maticians tell us that if there be a number of indepen-
dent expectations, which amount nearly but not quite
to absolute certainty, the chance of their all being ful-
filled is comparatively small, even when compared with
that of the least likely of them. So that the chance of
no quadruped having reason will be much smaller than
that of the irrationality of all beavers, or of any other
kind whatsoever. In other words, our proper expecta-
tion of the fulfilment of any statement as to an artificial
class, should be much less than that of the correctness
of the same statement with regard to any individual
natural kind in that class.
I pray the candid and non-logical reader to omit the
paragraph in brackets. I pledge my word that it con-
tains nought which makes towards the main subject of
inquiry.
[The discussion which we have undertaken in this
chapter may throw some light on the logical question
of the Import of Propositions. From what we have


IOO
A Discourse on Truth.
said, I think it is clear that every proposition aims at
conveying the notion of a connection between two ideas,
that is, it aims at arousing in us a mental proposition,
wherein both subject and predicate are used in inten-
sion. But since it is important to convey not only the
fact of the connection of the two ideas, but also some
notion of the strength of the connection, and as this
strength depends upon the amount and nature of the
several experiences; the proposition attempts to con-
vey a portion of this knowledge by stating whether all
the instances have been one way or not, by the use of
the words 'All' and 'Some' respectively; by thus re-
ferring the mind to the individual instances, it may be
said to use the subject in extension at the moment of
the communication of the knowledge, though the ulti-
mate object is the conception of a purely intensive con-
nection between Subject and Predicate. Lastly, Propo-
sitions with regard to wide Artificial classes, use their
subject always in extension, but not in the fashion
usually imagined. They refer the mind to the indivi-
dual natural kinds, between which the subject serves as
an artificial link. It is with relation to kinds, and not
to individuals that the subject of such Proposition is in
Extension.]
We have seen then, gentle reader, that no single
statement such as those which we ordinarily use, is
capable of conveying an accurate notion of the state of


Summary.
101
the speaker's mind, still less of the experience on which
that state of mind was founded, and which is to us in
most cases, the all-important thing to know. No one
statement can be precisely true, according to our most
proper definition of the word Truth. But the sea ot
doubt into which this discovery seems to plunge us, is
neither so wide nor so deep as it at first appears. We
are often able to form fairly accurate guesses of the
amount of experience on which any statement rests, and
by comparing one experience with another, and all with
our own experience, to assimilate to ourselves the
knowledge of others in such rough but sufficient fashion
as shall render life possible. Moreover, in a great
number of instances, and those by far the most impor-
tant, the experience on which the general statement
rests is so wide, and the consequent connection between
the ideas so close, that thought passes from one to the
other with that imperceptible rapidity that we call cer-
tainty. Now, although we have shown that in this so-
called ' Absolute Certainty' there are really degrees of
strength, yet the shades are so slight and imperceptible,
that no great harm is done by mistaking one for the
other. I may be a trifle more or less certain of a state-
ment than my original informant; my mind may pass
from one idea to the other with more or less rapidity
than his, but as his mind passes from the one to the
other with a rapidity so great as to be imperceptible,


102
A Discourse on Truth.
and mine does the like, the difference between our
mental states is extremely unimportant.
So far, then, we have swum through one great wave,
and have discovered the imperfections of language with-
out being reduced to Absolute Scepticism as to the
value of all Human Knowledge. We have shown that
Truth, in the most proper sense of the term, is never
exactly attained in ordinary discourse, but may gene-
rally be approximated to sufficiently for the well-being
of mankind. We have now to deal with Truths in the
Scientific sense, those, to wit, which are expressly intended
as prophecies of coming events and phaenomena. These
prophecies may all be said to consist in the foretelling
of effects by means of the observation of causes, either
immediately or after a long chain of arguments in
which causes and effects constitute all the terms. The
discussion of the Nature of the Relation between Cause
and Effect, and the means of the discovery of this
Relation is the most important portion of the task im-
mediately before us. Let us hope that this discussion
may lead us to results jio more damaging to the secu-
rity of Human Knowledge than the inquiry which we
have lately completed.


CHAPTER IV.
ON CAUSE AND THE LAW OF UNIVERSAL CAUSATION.
Almost all those who have hitherto discussed the
subject with which we have now to deal (and surely
their name is Legion) seem to me to have confused, or at
least to have refrained from clearly distinguishing two
entirely separate questions. The first of these ques-
tions is, What is the connection or relation between
phaenomena, in virtue of which we call the one a cause
and the other an effect? The second is, What is the
notion which men ordinarily form of that connection or
relation? The distinction is a sufficiently obvious one,
and in almost all other enquiries is readily understood.
Thus no reasonable man would think that the enquiry
as to the nature of the force which keeps the earth and
the other planets in their position, was identical with
the investigation of the meaning which men ordinarily
attach to the word weight; though no doubt the true
explanation of weight (the real attribute I mean, and
not our vulgar idea of it) would also be a true explana-


104
A Discourse on Trtith.
tion of the principle which governs the motions of the
sun and planets.
Of course it is open to any man to assert that we
have a full and true notion of the connection called
Causation, and if we grant his assertion, the two ques-
tions will at once become one, since the knowledge
of the common notion will also be a knowledge of
that which this notion truly represents. This is the
position occupied by Brown in his 'Inquiry into the
Relation of Cause and Effect,' where he attempts to
prove both that a cause is an inseparable connection
between phaenomena, and that the notion which we form
of causation or power is merely that of inseparable con-
nection. The same identification of the two questions is
effected by the School of Reid and Hamilton, who with-
out stating with any great definiteness what they
understand by Causation, yet assert that all mankind
have an immediate and infallible conception of the
nature of a cause, so that here also the thing and the
idea of that thing coincide.
But it behoves the so-called Sceptical School, who
assert either that mankind have no notion of causation,
or that that notion is an imperfect one, to investigate
quite separately each of these two questions, and to
compare the answers obtained, in order that they
may be able to point out in what respects, if any, the
common notion of cause differs from the correct con-


Two Questions to be answered. 105
ception of its nature. Yet no one writer of this School
seems to have treated the matter quite satisfactorily
according to this criterion. Hume in his treatise on
'Human Nature,' and again in his' Essays,' is chiefly
concerned with the question as to what our idea of Cause
is, or more frequently, what it is not. The answer to
the entirely separate question, What is a causer is
either assumed or but very slightly glanced at. I shall
attempt to keep these two questions entirely separate
throughout this enquiry. If we discover that to each of
the two the same answer must be given, our confidence
in the credibility of the conclusions of the undisciplined
mind will be put on a firmer basis. If, on the other
hand, our two answers differ widely, we shall at least
be saved in future from the error of supposing that they
are identical.
Our first question then is, What is that connection
between phaenomena or sensations which constitutes the
one a Cause and the other an Effect. But before attempt-
ing to solve this question, we must first get an answer
to another and more simple one. Does the connection
exist between the things themselves independently of
the presence of a thinking subject who perceives them,
or does it lie only between phaenomena, that is the things
as they affect our senses, and is the connection merely
one which the mind has added to the phaenomena? To
put the question in another and perhaps more compre-


jo6
A Discourse on Truth.
hensible form, Does Causation exist in the external
world, or is it merely the result of some active power of
the mind which establishes for its own convenience
connections between phaenomena? To this latter ques-
tion we answer boldly. The connection between the
phaenomena is the work of the mind and the mind only.
A cause is merely that which the mind selects as a
sign of the coming of that other phaenomenon which it
calls an effect. An effect is merely that which the mind
chooses as a sign of the past existence of a cause. That
this selection is entirely arbitrary I do not of course
intend to assert, but that it is to some extent so, I think
we shall see as we proceed. I pray the reader not to be
staggered by the apparently paradoxical character of
our statement, but calmly and dispassionately to judge
the reasoning upon which that statement is founded.
Thus only will he act as a lover of Truth, our common
mistress.
Before, however, proceeding to our demonstration, it
will be well to clear away one doubt which may natu-
rally have arisen in the reader's mind. We saw, in the
last two chapters, that an attribute is a phaenomenon
which appears to our senses subsequently to our per-
ception of the thing, and separated from that first per-
ception by a more or less distinguishable interval of
time. We saw, too, that the presence of the thing
awoke in a greater or less degree the expectation of the


Causation and Attribution. 107
attribute—the sight of a rose at a distance arouses the
expectation of smelling it as we approach. Now when
we say that a Cause is merely the sign of the Effect, we
obviously mean simply that the cause is that thing or
phaenomenon whose perception will arouse in us an ex-
pectation of the perception of the Effect.
It seems, then, that our definition of causation differs
in no way from that which we have before given of
attribution, and that, according to our statement, it mat-
ters not whether we say such and such a phaenomenon
is the effect of such and such, or that the former pha-
e-
nomenon is the attribute of the latter. Such a result is,
however, obviously at variance with consciousness. We
cannot but feel that when we assert that one phaenomenon
is the effect of another, and when again we declare that
an attribute belongs to a thing, we mean to express
entirely distinct conceptions by the two forms of state-
ment. Wherein, then, does the difference lie? Merely
in this, that we can conceive the cause to be removed
and yet that the effect should remain, whereas we can-
not for a moment imagine it possible that a thing should
be removed and yet that its attribute should be still
present to our senses.
It may thus happen that the very same sensation may
be considered either as an attribute or as an effect, ac-
cording as it is or is not imagined as capable of endur-
ance after the 'thing' or the cause is removed. Thus


io8
A Discourse on Truth.
weight is unquestionably an attribute of any book, and
we are only made directly conscious of this weight by
the feeling of pressure on some portion of the body, as
for instance, the hand. Now this feeling of pressure
may endure a short time after the book is removed, and
in this case we no longer say that we feel the weight of
the book on our hand, but that we retain the feeling of
pressure caused by the book. The weight of the book
and the feeling of pressure are here two names repre-
senting the same sensation, but the former is regarded
as inseparable from the book we see, and the latter as
capable of separate existence.
We saw before that the visual appearance or picture
which forms our notions of the thing endures through-
out our experience of the attributes of that thing.
Any sensation then which we experience after the
appearance of the thing is removed from our eyes,
and which yet frequently or constantly follows the per-
ception of that thing, we call not the attribute but
the effect of that thing. In the same way one attri-
bute of a thing may be said to be the cause of another
attribute, if the two attributes frequently follow each
other in consciousness always in the same order and
the latter endures, or is imagined capable of endur-
ing, after the former has vanished. An attribute then
may be the cause of another attribute of the same thing,
as when we say that guilt is the cause of remorse, or of


Causation and Attribution.
109
some change in some other thing, as when we affirm
that ill-temper produces dislike, or lastly, and in but few
cases, it may be the cause of some thing in the proper
sense; Heat of the air produces a mist. A thing may
either be the cause of another thing, as an acorn of an
oak, or of some change in that other thing, as fire of the
melting of wax. (It may be said that we should more
properly assert that the heat of the fire was the cause of
the melting of the wax, but I shall attempt to prove
further that either expression is equally proper as it is
equally usual.) We can never properly say that a thing
is the cause of any of its own attributes, nor do I think
that we ordinarily attempt to do so, although philoso-
phers have for some inscrutable reason been always
extremely anxious that we should adopt this form of
expression.
The clear difference between Attribution and Causa-
tion lies then in this, that the attribute must always
be simultaneous with the thing, while the Effect must
always exist, or be conceived as capable of existing, sub-
sequently to the removal of the cause. There may be
many cases in which, as a matter of fact, causes are
usually concurrent with their effects, but I defy any one
to mention any effect which he cannot conceive as exist-
ing after its cause is removed, or any attribute which he
can conceive as present to his senses after the thing of
which it is an attribute has vanished from consciousness.


r 10
A Discourse on Truth.
This being the distinction between Causation and Attri-
bution, it is easy to see that they divide between them
all the connections of phaenomena which give rise to ex-
pectation.
There are, no doubt, other relations and conjunctions
between phaenomena, such as their identity, similarity,
and contrariety, but none of these give rise to expecta-
tion of any kind. To explain this absence of expectation
conjoined with some sort of conjunction of ideas would
be a task which, though by no means difficult, would
carry us too far afield.
Meanwhile we may be content with the assertion that
Causation and Attribution are the only two connections
between phaenomena which are of the slightest value in
man's mental code of signs. If a man perceive either of
the two signs, which we call a Cause and 'a Thing' re-
spectively, he at once expects the subsequent appearance
of an Effect or an Attribute, as the case may be. The
only difference between the nature of the expectation
in the two cases being that in the former he does not
necessarily believe that his present sensation will endure
throughout the time that he experiences the expected
sensation, whereas in the latter he does necessarily
assume the endurance of the present sensation of the
'thing' during the whole time that he shall experience
the expected Attribute.
Up to this time we have merely been explaining the


Historical Proof.
11 r
purport of our strange assertion that Causation was a
connection established by the mind between phaenomena.
It remains for us to prove that assertion. This, perhaps,
we shall best do by the historical method. Let us
imagine the noble Savage as altogether divested of all
inherited tendencies of thought and cast suddenly into
the world with all his senses and his newly-awakened
Reason in working order, but with absolutely no know-
ledge except that with which each successive moment
furnishes him. We shall then be able to solve the
question as to whether Causes already existed in this
world of which he was the first rational occupant, or
whether, strange as the statement seems, he placed them
there by degrees.
It must be allowed that our conception of this ideal
savage is, in all probability, historically speaking, an
inaccurate one. If we accept the theory of the Evolu-
tion of Species, we must grant that many of the tenden-
cies of man are to be traced back far down the scale
of organised life, and were evolved slowly and imper-
ceptibly out of rudimentary states of consciousness
of which fully developed man has entirely lost count.
It may probably be that the grouping of phaenomena,
considered as signs of future sensations, into the two
big classes of Causes with their Effects and Things with
their Attributes was prior, historically, to the evolution
of man. Without doubt the distinction was not a sudden


H2 A Discourse on Truth.
step forward, but a gradual development, of which the
intermediate steps are long since forgotten. Yet the
history of the imaginary Savage, which we propose to
study, will represent with sufficient accuracy the actual
progress of the Race through countless centuries.
We suppose, then, this creature with all the faculties
but without the experience of man, placed suddenly in
the midst of the universe. He would first have merely
a bewildered consciousness of constant changes. He
would behold only a wild flood of meaningless pheeno-
mena sweeping past him with horrible rapidity. But
if this creature is to survive a week this state of terrified
bewilderment cannot long continue. He must adjust
himself to his circumstances, neither can he do so
effectively unless he be able to anticipate phaenomena
before they arrive. In order to achieve this he must
observe that certain phaenomena are usually followed by
other phaenomena, so that if he perceives the first he will in
most cases be right in putting himself in readiness for the
second. He will then be able to arrange the most common
phaenomena into pairs, whereof the perception of the
first will lead to the expectation of the second. A much
later stage would be that, where from the perception of
the second he would be able to infer the prior or simul-
taneous existence of the first—would be able to argue
from effects back to causes. Later for two reasons.
First, because life would be possible and not even


Historical Explanation. 113
greatly increased in difficulty if the perception of pha-
e-
nomena which were usually subsequent in experience
did not immediately suggest to our minds the prior
existence of those phaenomena which in other similar
cases had been antecedents, since no immediate action
would in most cases arise from such backward thought
from effects to Causes, and immediate actions are those
with which thought is in the first instance concerned;
secondly, by reason of the difficulty of thinking in
inverted order of sensation, a difficulty which would
only in fact be got over when having experienced the
properly subsequent phaenomenon, the Effect, he were
afterwards rendered conscious of the fact that the Cause
had existed previously or simultaneously. In this case
the Cause, although prior or simultaneous in order of
existence, would be later in order of sensation or con-
sciousness, and thus the difficulty of thinking in inverted
order would be overcome.
But we have been anticipating; we have at present
only got up to this point in the history of our Savage;
he has arranged all common phaenomena as far as may
be into pairs, but has not yet made the distinction
between Causation and Attribution. How he is impelled
to this further step we have yet to see. We have
assumed throughout—and surely the assumption is an
allowable one—that the chief object, conscious or un-
conscious, of our savage is to adjust his actions to his
1


H4 A Discourse on Truth.
circumstances and to render his life as secure and free
from pain as possible. Now it would be important for
him to notice that there are certain phaenomena which
only followed other phaenomena after some action of his
own, whereas other sequences of phaenomena occurred
entirely independently of any motion of his. Thunder
followed lightning while he lay still on his back watching
the cloudy sky, but fire only proceeded from a dry stick
whenever he chose to rub another stick against it.
Generally speaking, we may say that the attributes of
the thing are only made known to us by some action of
our own, but that effect follows cause while we remain
passive. The distinction, then, would soon be made
between those sensations which were signs to the savage
that he might, if he liked to perform certain actions,
experience some other sensation, and those which were
signs that he must experience the sensation whether he
would or no.
Now although I say and believe that it was the dis-
tinction between sequences of phaenomena which would
be completed independently of himself, and those
which required action of his own, which suggested to the
mind of our Savage the division between Causation and
Attribution, yet must I confess that the two lines of
division are by no means parallel. For instance, it is
an attribute of the tiger to devour oxen, and he will
perform that function without any action whatsoever


Distinction between Attribution and Causation. 115
either of the oxen or of their keeper. But in the first
place, by far the greater number of things are im-
movable and none of their attributes (except in rare
instances that of smell) will be experienced by the man
who perceives them without some further action of his
own. In the second place, with regard to animals or
moving things, it was not the immediate attribute but
some subsequent sensation of the man which was
usually forced upon his notice. The action of the jaws
of the lion or tiger was not that which concerned the
savage, but his own subsequent loss of his sheep or
oxen and consequent hunger. Of such subsequent
sensations the animal was the cause in the strict sense
of the word. If, as we shall attempt to show later on,
the original notion of Causation is closely connected with
that of animal action, we shall have no difficulty in
understanding how it may have been that the divergence
between the two lines of separation which we have
noticed, remained long unperceived, and that the dis-
tinction of Causation and Attribution, on the one hand,
from independent and conditional sequence of phaeno-
mena on the other is due to a much later development
of the human Reason.
The gradual progress which we have attributed to
our Savage and his tentative groupings of phaenomena
into the pairs of Cause and Effect, Substance and Attri-
bute, is precisely the history of the work of Science
i 2


n6
A Discourse on Truth.
from the beginning of the world until now. She is ever
rejecting signs which she has found are less often than
others followed by the thing whose expectation she
wishes to arouse, or which, for other reasons which we
shall discuss later, are less convenient than the new
signs which she substitutes for them. But while she is
continually destroying causal links and forging new
ones, she modestly asserts that she does nothing but
discover. How arbitrary are the processes by which
she manufactures some of her signs we shall see in
the chapter on Induction. There too we shall prove
at length that however carefully Science may choose
her signs, yet must they always be inadequate to the
variety of Nature. There also we shall attempt to
explain how it is that we regard some sequences of
phenomena as causal and others as merely casual, and
what is the exact meaning of this latter word.
We have now explained and I think proved our
assertion, that a causal connection is an arbitrary link
manufactured by the mind of man to connect phaeno-
mena. But an objection may be raised which as far as
it goes has some weight. A man might say, I admit
that the ideas of the phaenomena are connected in the
mind, but this is not the whole truth, nor is this what I
mean when I say that the phaenomena are selected as
Cause and Effect. According to your own theory the
connection of the ideas in the mind arises from, and is


Objection to Historical Theory.
117
proportional to, the occasions on which the phaenomena
have been connected in experience. It is this connec
tion in experience, and not the mere connection of the
ideas, wherein I consider Causation to exist.
I may remark that experience in this sentence means
precisely the experience of man, and that this expe-
rience of man can never be the measure of the universe.
Moreover the experience of any two phaenomena can give
us information of those two phaenomena, and those alone.
It can tell us nought of any phaenomena in the future.
The only way in which the fact that phaenomenon A has
followed phaenomenon B in the past is connected with
any future sequence of similar phaenomena is through
my ideas. A and B, as external phaenomena, having
passed are absolutely at an end, they have no power
or weight whatsoever, but my idea of the sequence
between A and B remains, and when I encounter a new
sequence of similar phaenomena, A' and B', I am aware
of the resemblance between this new sequence and the
memory of the old one, and henceforth the conjunction of
the ideas which represent A and A', and B and B', respec-
tively in my mind will be closer. It is in the mind, and in
the mind only, that the conjunction is permanent. That
between external phaenomena is destroyed on each
occasion with the destruction of the phaenomena them-
selves. The objection however may be so far admitted
as to induce us to modify slightly our definition of Cau-


u8
A Discourse on Truth.
sation. The connection between Cause and Effect is not
strictly speaking arbitrary when we are dealing with
natural and ordinary sequences of phaenomena, though
it is still purely mental. We shall see further on that
this qualification is not nearly so important as it at first
appears, and that most of the causal links manufactured
by Science are purely Arbitrary.
The Doctrine of Causation which we have laid down
above is at variance with two theories very much in
vogue among philosophers. The first is that which
asserts, that a large number of causes unite together to
produce one effect. The second declares the Absolute
Uniformity of Nature, and upon that Uniformity founds
its theory of Induction. These two theories are more
closely connected than might appear at first sight, and
I shall therefore examine them together. In order that
we may accomplish this task satisfactorily we must
start with the statement of the Definition of Cause as it
is propounded by the philosophy most in vogue.
"A cause," says Mr. Mill (here following Brown), "is
merely the invariable unconditional antecedent of any
phaenomenon. It is, properly speaking, the sum of all
the conditions, positive and negative, which being ful-
filled, that phaenomenon will necessarily and in all cases
appear." According to this statement, a fall from the
window is not, strictly speaking, the cause of my
breaking my neck, but only a part of the cause. The


Examination of Mr. Mill's Theory. 119
whole cause includes the law of gravity, the construc-
tion of my flesh and muscles, the hardness of the
pavement below the window, and a host of other
facts. These are the positive conditions, and how
many there be, who can tell? but the negative ones are
yet more numerous, and, indeed, are literally infinite.
The fact that I cannot fly, that no one caught me in his
arms, that the air is not buoyant, are a few of the most
obvious of these negative conditions. Now as this infi-
nite number of conditions, positive and negative, can
never be stated, it follows that we can never state the
true cause of a phaenomenon. But, says Mr. Mill, it is
only necessary to state each and every of the positive
conditions of the appearance of the phaenomenon, the
negative ones being assumed to be fulfilled in every
case. The sum of the positive conditions, together with
the implied but not expressed negative conditions, will
be the true cause of the phaenomenon. Let us see
whether this modification of the doctrine will' be of
much avail to him.
At the moment of any phenomenon coming into being
there are existing at any given spot, where the observer
may be placed, an innumerable number of other phaeno-
mena, of which he notices the most salient or the most
unusual, but leaves unnoticed the less marked and those
to which he is well-accustomed. Then, says Mr. Mill,
whenever the phaenomenon is presented, we notice as


120
A Discourse on Truth.
many as we may of the phaenomena immediately pre-
ceding its appearance. When next the same phaeno-
menon appears we again notice the precedent phaeno-
mena, and find that a certain portion* of them are
common to the former case. We perform this operation
on several occasions, and find that on each of them a
certain number of phaenomena (or perhaps one only)
recur as antecedents of that phaenomenon whose cause
we are investigating. We perhaps go further than this
and observe a group of phaenomena which in all its
more salient points resembles some one of those groups
which have been followed by that phaenomenon whose
cause we are seeking to discover, but which lacks pre-
cisely those phaenomena (or that phaenomenon) which
we have discovered to be a constant factor in all our
previous experiments where the effect required has
occurred. We now find that in this new experiment
the effect does not occur. Are we now warranted in
asserting that these phaenomena which were present in
our former experiments, but are absent in this latter
one, are the cause or invariable unconditional ante-
cedent of the phaenomenon which has always followed
them in our experience, and vanishes when they vanish?
Mr. Mill says, decidedly, Yes.
In order that this assertion may have any logical
basis we must assume two principles. The first is that
Nature is Uniform; that is, that phaenomena follow


Mr. Mill's Proof of the Uniformity of Nature. 121
each other in an invariable order. This principle Mr.
Mill attempts to prove, and we shall examine his proof
shortly. But we will now turn to the second of his
two assumptions, which is equally necessary for the
support of his argument, and which he tacitly assumes
without endeavouring at all to substantiate it. If the
group of phaenomena A, B, C, D are all those which
are observed or observable as preceding phaenomenon
Z, and in another case A, G, H, I also precede phae-
nomenon Z, while neither B, C, D nor G, H, I alone
are followed by Z, then, supposing Nature to be Uni-
form, we may be justified in asserting that A is the
invariable unconditional antecedent of Z.
But do we ever get such a simple experience as
this? I assert that we neither do nor can. Our real
experience is after this fashion: we have in one case
A, G, H, I, and an infinite number of other phae-
nomena, noticed and unnoticed, followed by Z, and in
another A, B, C, D, with also an infinite number, fol-
lowed also by Z, while B, C, D and G, H, I, each with
their infinite train of companions, are not followed by Z.
Now, the question is, What logical right have I to
assume that A, K, L, M, with its infinite chorus, will be
followed by Z? That I shall expect it to be so followed
is obvious, since A is a cause of Z, in my sense of the
word as well as in that of Mr. Mill. But, whereas I
should only be moderately astonished at A not being


122 A Discourse on Truth.
followed by Z, with a kind of astonishment which,
varying in degrees, I experience almost every day, Mr.
Mill would cry out that a miracle had been accom-
plished, and the order of Nature reversed.
And yet to the ordinary mind it does not seem that
anything so extraordinary has occurred. Assuming the
ordinary notion of Causation as an indissoluble connec-
tion between phaenomena, it may have been that in each
of the cases in which Z followed, there was an un-
observed phaenomenon R, which was the real cause of
Z, while in cases in which Z did not occur it was absent,
and it was also absent in the group of phaenomena
A, K, L, M, etc. Moreover, even supposing that A
were the cause of Z in this sense, it might well happen
that some of the unnoticed phaenomena in the group
A, K, L, M, etc., might be what is called a Coun-
teracting Cause. Of the real nature of these so-
called Counteracting Causes I shall treat fully in my
chapter on Induction, but for the present it is sufficient
for us to notice that as long as our experience be given
us in this involved chaos of phaenomena, we have never a
logical warranty for asserting that any one phaenomenon
will necessarily be preceded or followed by any other,
although our expectation of this sequence may rise to
almost any degree of strength.
The value of Mr. Mill's Inductive Methods is simply
in the increase of expectation which they cause by, as


Infinity of Antecedent Phcenomena.
123
it were, isolating the phaenomena, and fixing our atten-
tion on those only which will form, according to our past
experience, the most convenient signs. Nought could
give absolute. Logical validity to Mr. Mill's methods
except the assumption, either that this infinity of un-
noticed phaenomena is fixed in every case, or that the
unnoticed phaenomena in no case influence the result.
As to the former assumption, the exact reverse of it
is true. Out of the infinite variety of phaenomena which
combine to constitute one moment's experience, we may
safely assert that all are never again repeated together
in precisely the same proportions. As to the second
assumption, we need only say that it is never capable of
proof, and is often obviously untrue. Many of those
causes which are now considered most potent are phae-
nomena which, till within the last few years, were'
absolutely unnoticed. Who, fifty years ago, would have
looked to infected milk as the most fruitful cause of
typhoid fever?
"Nay, but by experiment, we can really isolate the
phaenomena, or introduce into a thoroughly known state
of things a change perfectly definite." That you can
get rid of a great number of variable phaenomena I
readily admit. But who shall drink the sea dry? After
all your most careful eliminations, an infinity of phae-
nomena is with you still. Place an apparently simple
substance under a receiver, exhaust as far as you can


124 Discourse on Truth.
all the air, insert some other apparently simple sub-
stance or gas, and watch the combination. Which of
you can tell what may be the subtle chemical influence
of the materials of the glass, or the effect of the diverse
composition of the rays of light which penetrate the
vessel? I speak not of the previous history of the two
substances, and the chance that what now seems to you
simple may some day be proved to be composite. All
these matters are doubtless themselves subjects of ex-
periment, and may one day be discovered and cal-
culated. Yet who can stale the infinite variety of
Nature? For each phaenomenon which we investigate
and check off she meets us with a multitude of new
phaenomena whose existence we had hitherto neither
observed nor expected. Believing this to be the
case, we assert that no cause in the sense demanded
by Mr. Mill's definition has ever been, nor ever will be
discovered.
Let us now return to the examination of the sheet-
anchor of this theory of Induction, the doctrine of the
Uniformity of Nature, that is, the assertion that in all
future time from precisely similar antecedents similar
consequents will ensue. Most of those who have pro-
pounded this doctrine have held that it was an ultimate
belief, itself incapable of proof, but the acceptation
of which was necessary if we were ever to attain any
absolute certainty about the external world. Mr. Mill,


Uniformity of Nattire.
125
however, is bolder than his predecessors; he asserts
that this Law, upon which all Induction rests, is itself
an Induction.
It might seem strange to the unsophisticated hearer,
if we were to say to him, "I beg you to notice, that
unless the Law of the Uniformity of Nature be true
we have no security of the truth of any Induction,
and also to observe that the Law of the Uniformity
of Nature is itself proved by Induction." He might
naturally object that in order to prove this Law to be
true he would have, according to the explanation of his
informant, first to assume it to be true—to prove it, in
fact, by means of itself. Mr. Mill is quite sensible of
the possibility of this objection, but the method in which
he meets it is, to say the least, curious.
It is because of his anxiety to prove that all our know-
ledge is got either from Sensation or from Induction that
he will not allow the Law of the Uniformity of Nature to
stand unsupported as an ultimate belief or portion of
knowledge. How, then, is the Law to be proved? It
is obvious that we do not learn it immediately from sen-
sation; it remains that it shall arise from Induction.
But does not this Induction itself require the assumption
of this Law? Perhaps not in all cases. Scientific
Inductions, where we attempt to isolate the phaenomena
and establish an unconditional sequence, do certainly
derive all their validity from this Law. But there is


126
A Discourse on Truth.
another class of Inductions, which are more commonly
employed by the vulgar, which are performed by merely
enumerating the instances of a phaenomenon occurring,
and being followed by some other phaenomenon, without
any attempt at isolating either the former or the latter
phaenomenon, and proceeding from this enumeration to
assume that the one phaenomenon is cause and the other
effect. Now these Inductions by Simple Enumeration,
as they are called, do not require the assumption of the
Law of the Uniformity of Nature, for the simple reason
that they do not fulfil its conditions, and are, therefore,
incapable of being supported by it. In the use of this
Induction we make no attempt to prove that all the
antecedents are the same in any two observed cases,
and therefore have no ground, according to the Law of
the Uniformity of Nature, for expecting a uniform con-
sequent. Mr. Mill, therefore, in common with all logi-
cians, from the time of Bacon downwards, looks upon
such Inductions with the greatest suspicion, and warns
us that we can never hope by means of them to estab-
lish true Laws of Nature, and that the use of such
inductions renders us immediately and peculiarly liable
to the overthrow occasioned by the discovery of a single
Negative Instance, a danger from which he believes his
own scientific Inductions are entirely free.
Are we, then, to establish the law upon the validity of
which all Scientific Induction rests by means of a method


Uniformity of Nature.
127
which the propounders of that Scientific Induction reject
as invalid and dangerous? This seems a startling pro-
ceeding; yet hear Mr. Mill: "The precariousness of
the method of simple enumeration is in inverse ratio to
the largeness of the generalization. The process is
delusive and insufficient exactly in proportion as the
subject-matter of the observation is special and limited
in extent. As the sphere widens this unscientific
method becomes less and less liable to mislead; and
the most universal class of truths, the law of causation
[t. e.y of the Uniformity of Nature], for instance, and
the principles of number and geometry, are duly and
satisfactorily proved by that method alone, nor are they
susceptible of any other proof." (Mill/ Logic,' book III.,
chapter xxi., section 3.)
I would ask any disciple of Mr. Mill to explain to
me from whence we get the knowledge of the principle,
"That the precariousness of the method of simple enume-
ration is in an inverse ratio to the largeness of the gene-
ralisation." It certainly is not given us directly by
sensation. Neither can we get it by Induction, since it is
itself the foundation of all valid Induction, whether
simple or scientific—of simple Induction directly—of
Scientific Induction by means of the Law of Universal
Causation, whose certainty is said to be dependent upon
it. It must then be an ultimate belief or fact in knowledge;
but it was just because we would not admit the existence


128
A Discourse on Truth.
of such ultimate beliefs that we set about to prove the
truth of the Law of Universal Causation, or the Uni-
formity of Nature. If our original assumption has broken
down and we must assume some ultimate belief, it would
surely be better to assume at once the Law of Universal
Causation, which is simple and intelligible, and moreover
commonly accepted by mankind, than to attempt to prove
it by the equally unprovable assumption of the very
elaborate and doubtful law which we are asked to accept
on the ipse dixit of Mr. Mill.
We have now arrived at this point—That the Law of
the Uniformity of Nature is unprovable, and that if it
be accepted at all, it must be received as an ultimate
belief which lies at the root of all knowledge, and of the
truth of which we are directly conscious. Against this
latter doctrine we might bring forward all the arguments
which Mr. Mill and his fore-runners of the Sensational
School have insisted upon, as proving the non-existence
of any beliefs other than those derived from Sensation
or Induction.
But a simpler course than this lies open to us. The
principle of the Uniformity of Nature in strictness
asserts this and this only, That any phaenomenon will
be repeated if all the preceding phaenomena be pre-
cisely repeated; since from what we have said it is clear
that we cannot decide whether any of the multitude of un-
noticed phaenomena makes for or against the result, and


The Law is unmeaning.
129
therefore, whether the absence or change of any of them
will affect that result. But, as we have already shown,
the whole of the phaenomena present at any one moment,
are never (or can never be proved to be) exactly repeated
at any subsequent occasion; therefore, if the only valid
connections between phaenomena are discovered by the
observation of such never-existent exact uniformity, we
shall be able to get no connections whatsoever, and
the world will again be reduced to the chaos of dis-
connected sensations from which man's mind forced it
to issue.
The fact is that we can never answer the question
whether or no Nature would do the same thing again
under precisely similar circumstances, because we never
again meet with those precisely similar circumstances.
The Law of the Uniformity of Nature is only not untrue
because it is absolutely unmeaning. Nature moves and
mark's mind moves to keep pace with her. The world
around him becomes ever more complex, the relations of
life ever more bewildering, and correspondently with this
increased complexity is the number increased of those
ideal connections between phaenomena which enable man
to act decisively and quickly, though they do not always
enable him to act in such a fashion as will best adapt
him for the coming phaenomenon, since his expectation
can never be free from all danger of error.
The only uniformity which exists at present and has
K


130
A Discourse on Truth.
existed for a long term of years is a rough uniformity
between man's adaptive power and the gradually in-
creasing complexity of his universe. That such a
Uniformity will always continue, or that it will con-
tinue beyond to-day, no man has any right to assert.
Nature sometimes moves gradually forward, at others
she takes great leaps. If such another leap be made,
as in all probability may have been made before,
mankind will suddenly be rendered unable to adjust
himself to his circumstances, and will vanish from
the planet, as other species have done before him,
by reason of like sudden changes. But the proximity
or remoteness of such a change concerns him not one
whit. What it behoves him to know is that which
tends to the extension or welfare of his life and species,
and since, in the event of such a great and sudden change
that species would disappear, he may safely presume
some such rough uniformity as we have indicated, since
it is only as long as such uniformity exists that thought
or knowledge is of any value to him.
It may perhaps be urged that from the point of view
of Pure Scepticism we have no right to assume that any
such change as I here anticipate would necessarily be
followed by the extinction of mankind, since this is in
fact assuming the ordinary doctrine of Causation at the
very moment we are arguing against it. The objection
is perhaps a valid one if the statement be looked upon


'The Future will resemble the Past! 131
as a prophecy of fact. But this at least we may assert,
that man existing under an entirely new set of circum-
stances must be thought of as an entirely distinct crea-
ture from him whom we now know, and conceive with
surroundings which are the same in essentials for all
members of the species. Such a potential future Man
we can in no way represent in fancy, nor consequently
take any interest in his well-being or misery. And this
assertion is all that is necessary for a practical justifica-
tion of all science and all action upon expectation.
But the upholders of the theory of the Absolute Uni-
formity of Nature have yet another stronghold. They
affirm that their maxim is but another way of stating the
universal belief That the Future will resemble the Past,
and that without this belief all action would be meaning-
less and impossible. We have seen already that if this
maxim means that like results will follow in cases which
are in all respects perfectly similar, then it may or may
not be true in some world where we get exact repetitions
of all the phenomena which constitute the complex ex-
perience of any one moment, but that in this world it is
simply unmeaning. So far from the Induction by which,
according to Mr. Mill, we arrive at this law being one of
the widest of any and depending upon the most extended
experience, it is precisely that of which we have not a
single particular instance. If all Induction rests merely
upon this support, then truly is the position of Science


132
A Discourse on Truth.
hopeless, and universal doubt the necessary consequence
of any analysis of the groundwork of our beliefs.
If, on the other hand, the principle be brought down to
the convenient roughness of every-day life, and it be said
that 'In our investigations of Nature we have usually
observed that where the great majority of noticed ante-
cedent phaenomena are like those in some known cases,
the sequent phaenomenon in the new case resembles that
which we have met with in the previously observed
case/ the principle is true but too cumbrous and too
vague for any practical purpose; since we do not habi-
tually observe, nor as I assert need we observe all the
antecedent noticeable phaenomena in order to discover
or manufacture a causal link; and on the other hand
there are certain cases where the vast majority of ante-
cedent phaenomena exactly resemble those which we
have noticed in some previously observed cases, and
where yet we do not expect the same sequent phaeno-
menon as we have experienced in those cases. Whether
we do or do not expect the same sequent phaenomenon in
cases in which the vast majority of the antecedents
resemble each other depends upon certain conditions,
into which we shall enquire later; but every case has
to be judged on its own merits, and the application of
this approximate general principle of the Uniformity of
Nature in no case tends to throw much light on the
matter.


Analysis of the Future.
133
But there is another sense which may be attached to
the statement that, The Future resembles the Past,
which, though very far from the minds of these Experi-
ential Philosophers, conveys a truth, and that a most
important one. As a matter of fact, What is the
Future? Surely not the vague potential Something-to-
Come, which is not and never will be, but simply the
sum of the ideal states which are or may be aroused in
my mind by any present sensation or emotion, and
the passage to which constitutes our expectation. The
Future is, in fact, a portion of the Present and the child
of the Past. If this be the only intelligible meaning
which can be attached to the word Future (and that it
is so I think everyone will, after a little consideration,
admit), then to say that the Future will resemble the
Past, or more correctly, that the Future does resemble
the Past, is a truism of the most obvious kind.
I must needs foresee that the statements contained in
the last paragraph will be received by the majority of
my readers with doubt and repugnance; with doubt,
because the conception of the Future contained therein,
though I believe the only possible one, does not accord
with certain expressions common among mankind which
seem to have a meaning, although, as I shall attempt
to prove, they are mere metaphorical phrases, to which
a definite sense could be attached only by the assump-
tion of hypotheses which would at once be rejected as


134
A Discourse 011 Truth.
myths by the vast majority of civilized men; with Re-
pugnance, because the doctrine I have laid down jars,
or seems to jar, with certain accepted theological tenets.
The doubt I shall attempt to remove by a further
minute examination of the statement in all its bearings.
The theological repugnance I may perhaps alleviate, if I
cannot altogether remove it, by showing that the oppo-
sition between my assertion and the beliefs engrafted in
every conscientious mind, is not so great as it at first
appears. This much I may safely claim for myself, that
as I hold that Reason is but a fallible judge, even in
matters of this world, and hath limits set round her on
every side beyond which she cannot pass, so I may can-
didly believe that if there be any other power in man or
portion of men—call it Soul or what you will—to which
beliefs are spiritually communicated, Reason hath
neither power nor right to judge of these beliefs. It is
with the Future, as apprehended by Reason according
to the laws of Reason, that I am alone concerned.
That our notion of the Future is equivalent to the Sum
of all the things which we expect will happen to us,
seerts at first sight so obvious a truth, as to require no
explanation. That expectation (other things being
equal) is proportioned to the amount of past experience
(as it is in each individual case the result of that expe-
rience) is admitted by all psychologists, and has been
assumed by us throughout. But when we come to exa-


Analysis of the notion of the Past. 135
mine the matter a little more closely, we run across a
difficulty. We feel that we require an answer to the
question, What is the precise idea or variation of ideas
represented by the Future Tense r
I say that Dogs bite, and mean that my notion of dogs
has been connected by past experience with that of
biting, and remains so connected. The same connec-
tion of ideas may cause me to say when I see a savage-
looking dog, 'I expect that this dog will bite,' but
although both statements rest upon the same connection
of ideas, they are obviously not identical in meaning.
Wherein, then, does the difference lie? What is that
notion of future time which belongs to the latter state-
ment but not to the former?
Perhaps we may get a little light upon this subject
by discussing first the easier question of our notion
of past time. What do I mean by saying we have
a remembrance of a past event? The event of course
must be the observation of some phaenomenon, that is,
some change in an observed thing; the notion of the
event considered separately will be then merely the
idea of the thing followed by the idea of this change
in it. But in order that I may conceive the thing as
past, and still more in order that I can assign to it a
definite position in past time, I must have a remem-
brance more or less accurate of the events which imme-
diately preceded and followed it, and of the other


136
A Discourse on Truth.
phaenomena which were simultaneous with it; I must
put the picture into its proper setting; in order further
that I may estimate how long ago it happened, I must
have a vague conception of the number of events which
have happened to me since it occurred. Such ordinary
events as the periodical eating of meals and going to bed
are those by which we most usually judge of distance of
time, that is, we calculate it by hours and days. But it
has often been observed that when a number of impor-
tant events have occurred to us in some short space, the
comparatively unimportant experiences which preceded
them seem removed from us by months or years. That
'One short sweet hour of crowded life is worth a
thousand spent in dreams' is true psychologically as
well as emotionally. A past event, then, is repre-
sented by memory in a setting and with the notion
of ideal passage backward over a number of other sen-
sations. On the other hand, the connection of ideas
which is represented by a universal proposition stands
out quite independently; it has no setting whatsoever,
neither is there any passage of the mind over other
ideas representing intermediate events.
Now intermediate between these two extreme limits
is the notion of the individual future event (and it is
to be noticed that all notions of the future, as all
memories of the past, are properly individual). It
has neither the entire independence of all other ideas


Analysis of the Future. 137
represented by the universal proposition, nor the exact
fixity in a frame at a given distance from us which con-
stitutes our notion of a past experience.
Let us take two or three simple future propositions,
and analyze them. Suppose I say, 'I think my friend
will arrive here to-morrow.' What precise mental state
do my words represent? The two most obvious elements
of this mental state are the idea of my friend, and the
complex notion of his arrival, probably including an
idea of my pleasure at seeing him again. But beyond
these two chief ideas there is somewhat more; there is
the notion of the division of these sensations from me by
the lapse of a" day. Now, of yesterday, or of any pre-
ceding day, I have a definite notion, as consisting of a
number of sensations in a given order, whereof some
recur daily, but by far the greater part are changeable.
If, then, twenty-four hours are to elapse between the
present time and my friend's arrival, I conceive the
fixed daily sensations which I experienced in the last
twenty-four hours as repeated between my present sen-
sations and the looked-for arrival of my friend, and
thus push off the notion of his arrival to an ideal dis-
tance in my mind. But these notions of fixed events as
constituting my day in yesterday's experience and
memory were set in a frame by, or themselves acted as
a frame for, a number of events which I can in no way
insert into my idea of to-morrow, since they have varied


138
A Discourse on Truth.
in daily experience; that idea then resembles a picture-
frame with divisions in it, but with great gaps where
the most important parts of the picture should be.
That there must be a number of events to fill up these
gaps I am well aware, but I have no means of filling
them up myself.
In the same way as there are gaps in my notion'of
the sensations which must intervene between my present
experience and that of the arrival of my friend, so is
the ideal setting of the picture of his arrival imper-
fect. I may, indeed, imagine our meeting to take
place in some known spot, and may have sufficiently
strong reasons for doing so to give vividness to the
imagination. But the attitude and gestures of both
of us, the presence or absence of other members of my
household, the varieties of dress of one or other—all
these, or at least the greater part of them, must be re-
presented by blank spaces in my picture; whereas in
the corresponding picture of yesterday's experience all
these accessories are represented with more or less dis-
tinctness, or at least can be recalled at will.
Let us take now a somewhat vaguer future proposi-
tion. Suppose I am a young and rising barrister, and
say ' I hope some day to become Lord Chancellor,' or
'that I shall some day be Lord Chancellor.' Here the
main conjunction of notions is between the two complex
ideas of myself as I know myself now, and of the per-


Analysis of the Future. 139
formance of the various functions which constitute my
notion of the Lord Chancellor's office, the presiding
over the House of Lords, etc. But here, as before, the
two ideas and their connection are driven into the back-
ground in consciousness, and I only arrive at them after
passing rapidly in thought over a number of steps
which, although they have not formed part of my per-
sonal experience, I have yet noticed as having been
traversed by others who have arrived&t the Woolsack;
the successive promotions to the position of Queen's
Counsel, Solicitor-General, Attorney-General, etc. Now
between each of these steps there is, in my notion of
the case, a great blank of days and years whose length
I cannot fully estimate (that is the length, in my notion,
for in actual fact the length may be infinite, as I may
never become Lord Chancellor at all). Each of these
days I imagine so far \o resemble the days of my past
experience, that it will be full of successive sensations,
but I cannot in any way imagine these sensations. I
have to leave them blank.
In this case, also, the two central notions have far
less setting than in the one which we before examined.
It is true that if I picture myself as Chancellor at
all, I must conceive my being so on some one occa-
sion, or successively on two or more occasions; I
must to a certain extent attempt to complete the pic-
ture with attendant circumstances. I shall probably


140
A Discourse on Truth.
imagine my first presentation to the House of Lords,
or my first speech therein, but the back-ground of
the picture in this case will be far vaguer than it
was in the other. The number of attendant circum-
stances I shall be able to imagine, will be less in
exact proportion as my past experience of similar cir-
cumstances is smaller. The complex picture will be
made up of ill-fitting and detached portions, consist-
ing of memories of what I have seen or heard of the
appearance and procedure of the House of Lords, and
on the other hand more accurate memories of my own
style of speaking, and between these detached por-
tions there will be great gaps which my imagination
can in no way fill up. It is to be noticed that this
future idea, though it is the only one which I can form,
must necessarily be falsified by experience, even sup-
posing that the hope represented by the words of the
proposition be fulfilled. The 'I' who will be Lord
Chancellor after a long term of years, will be a quite
different person, with different hopes, fears, and ambi-
tions from the 'I' whom I now imagine as sitting on
the Woolsack. But that new 'I' is no portion of my
Future at this moment. He is an absolute blank to me.
He exists not at all.
Let us now take the still vaguer and general propo-
sition. That we shall all die. This proposition, I
assert, is future in nothing but the form. It is merely


Universal Future Proposition.
141
the ordinary timeless universal proposition, All men die,
in another dress. If the notion of time be always got
by running over in thought a number of other sen-
sations before we arrive at the sensation remembered
or expected (for the process is the same both for the
Past and the Future, although it is accomplished more
perfectly for the former); then, in order that a propo-
sition may be regarded as future, there must be at least
some sensations which thought suggests as intervening
between the expected phaenomena and our present con-
sciousness. Now we know that people die every moment,
therefore thought cannot in this case suggest other
sensations which will intervene between our present
consciousness and the next death. We only give a real
future significance to the expression by a half-conscious
limitation of its extension. We think only of the deaths
of ourselves and our nearer friends and acquaintance,
and push each of these events off, in imagination, to a
considerable distance in time by imagining a number
of other sensations as intervening between these deaths
and our present consciousness. It is true, and we know
that it is true, that we and all they may die next
moment. But, nevertheless, we expect for ourselves
and each of them a greater prolongation of life. Our
Future, as it is to us at this moment, gives time to each
of them.
By the comparison of these three instances we get the


142 A Discotirse on Truth.
following conclusions: First, that a proposition in the
future tense always represents the conjunction of two
ideas which are more closely connected with other ideas
than is the case with the ideas whose conjunction is
represented by a universal proposition, and less so than
those whose conjunction is marked by the past tense.
Secondly, that the more individual and near in point
of time be the future proposition, the more nearly it
resembles a past proposition in mental content. Thirdly,
that all the material both for the main ideas and for the
accessory setting represented by such a future propo-
sition is drawn from the past.
It might seem, perhaps, as if my explanation of the
Future left little or no distinction between a future
notion and one which stands out clearly and distinctly
from a forgotten past; some detached remembrance of
childhood. But the distinctions between the two are
several and important. In the first place, in that past
remembrance I imagine myself as something different
from what I am now; as a child or a young man; I have
some notion, however imperfect, of what I was then from
memory, pictures, or description; of the future self I have
no individual notion whatsoever, though I may apply
to it general notions gained from experience of old men,
etc. In the second place, in order to go back to this dim
past event, I start by traversing rapidly in thought
yesterday and last year, notions which have a full


Popular Sayings.
143
content, while all my future time is vague. In the third
place, I have a definite sense of loss of memory, and in
many cases of the possibility of its revival with regard
to the accessories of the recollection of the past event,
but none as to the like accessories of the future notion.
We have now got to deal with some of the difficulties
of our theory. These consist chiefly in popular expres-
sions, from which it seems to take away all meaning.
For instance, we say that the Future is full of disap-
pointments, that is, often runs counter to expectation.
Again, we say that the Future is dark to us, or that we
know nought of the Future. Let us examine each of
these expressions separately.
The opposition between the first of them and our own
theory is merely apparent. The Future, in the sense
here used, I hold to be equivalent to the Sum of all
expectations. Now, according to our theory, the Sum of
all expectations will be the result of all past experience.
In this past experience will obviously be included many
disappointments of previous expectations. The expecta-
tion of disappointment will be joined with all our other
expectations, to make up that Sum of anticipation
which is the Future, and this, as it seems to me, is the
whole meaning of the sentence, which thus on analysis
admirably accords with our theory.
The next popular saying, I fully admit, can in no way
be reconciled with our doctrine, but neither can it be


144
A Discourse on Truth.
made to accord with any doctrine which asserts Human
Free Will or Spontaneity to the very smallest extent. It
is a statement founded upon the very narrowest Fatalism.
It, too, like our theory, regards the Future as already
existing, but as existing not in the mind of man but
externally to it. It is, in fact, merely a statement of the
old slavish theory common to all barbarous races since
the existence of the world, but rejected by Christianity
as well as by the higher Philosophy, which regards Man
as the mere Plaything of the Gods, led by them along a
dark and difficult valley, of which he remembers that
portion through which he has travelled, but knows
nought of that which is yet before him. In this painful
pilgrimage he is regarded as a mere passive spectator,
unable to alter aught of the evil around him. For if
one man can alter a little many can alter much, and the
whole fixity of the gloomy valley vanishes. I do not
assert that all who now use this expression hold such a
crude and slavish theory. The proverb, like many others,
probably suggests rather vague emotional associations
than any definite ideas, but I do aver that if any
definite meaning is to be given to the words some
such theory as that which I have described must be
accepted.
And this discussion opens naturally the way for the
attack in flank, at all events, if not in face, on that
objection which I have most cause to dread—that, I


Theological Difficulty.
145
mean, which comes from the side of theology. If my
assertion of the non-existence of any Future other than
that which exists in the mind of each individual
thinking being be held to impugn The Omniscience of
God, I answer that the task of reconciling That Omni-
science with the Free Will of man has ever been found
a hopeless one by the theologians, and that my theory
neither increases nor diminishes that difficulty.
These matters are too high for us, and we can but
render ourselves dizzy by the attempt to compass them.
If, however, anything that I have said be thought in any
way to contravert our hopes of future bliss, this objec-
tion can only be founded upon a misconception of my
meaning. God's promises, which we have heard from our
earliest infancy, form part of our past and give rise to
expectations. The nature of those expectations is, no
doubt, entirely conditioned by our past experience; we
can only imagine Heaven as an Earth with all the
pleasures increased and all the pains removed. This
is all that God's promises directly convey to us. He
has spoken to us in such language as we could under-
stand, even as when he inspired Joshua to command the
sun and the moon to stand still. We have a further belief,
also gathered from God's promises, and therefore from
our own past experience, that all our conceptions of
Heaven are entirely inadequate. This belief, however, is
merely negative; it adds nought to our expectations, but
L


146 A Discourse on Truth.
merely sobers them, and renders them more faint. That
that Future which God has not revealed but merely sug-
gests to us, both already exists to him and shall certainly
await us, is a doctrine which seems to me to present no
speculative difficulties. It may well be that as there is
no variableness, neither shadow of turning in God's
nature, so neither is there change in his presence. Yet,
again, all Christians believe him to be All-powerful,
hence every idea which is in his mind now he will
infallibly bring into being when it seems to him
good.
I know not whether I have done wisely in touching
these difficulties even with a light and reverent hand.
It may well be that I shall find that men's prejudices
are like quick-lime, and that to handle them in any way
can only raise them to their full intensity. It may be,
also, that I shall rouse the wrath of the theologians by
what they may regard as . an intrusion into their pro-
vince. If, however, the few suggestions which I have
thrown out may satisfy the doubts of any one man who
combines a love of Truth with a tender conscience and
a firm faith, I am fully recompensed for any odium I
may incur.
Up to this point I have been occupied solely with the
question, What, as a matter of fact, is a causal connec-
tion? This question I have solved, as I hope and
believe, satisfactorily, and the solution is at least so far


Humes Theory.
H7
in agreement with that given by Hume, that both he
and I declare that the causal connection between phae-
nomena is furnished entirely by the human mind and
exists not in the phaenomena themselves. There are,
however, very considerable differences in details; and
before proceeding to the second part of our subject—the
discussion of the idea which mankind in general forms of
the Nature of Causation—it may be well to note carefully
what these differences are, and to see how far our modifi-
cations of the theory of Hume may enable us to meet
certain weighty objections which have been brought
against that theory as stated by him.
Let us place the two theories side by side. Hume's
theory is this, A causal link is the mental connection
between two ideas, or between an impression and an
idea, which is due to the force of the habit of thought
arising from the invariable conjunction of two impres-
sions in past time. (Hume uses the word 'Impression'
in the same sense as we have frequently used the phrase
Individual Experience, as equivalent to a single sensa-
tion or emotion; an Idea is with him as with us a repro-
duction of such a sensation or emotion in a fainter de-
gree.) Our theory is that the causal link is a connection
which the mind of man establishes between phaenomena
for its own convenience, the two phaenomena having
followed each other in past time, but not necessarily
either frequently or invariably. Either of the phaenomena


148
A Discourse on Truth.
are regarded as the sign of the other, but primarily and
more usually the Cause as the sign of the approach of
the Effect.
Now against Hume's theory of Causation, Brown points
out with great force, what in fact Hume himself seems
at times to be aware of, that the reference of the Causal
connection between phaenomena entirely to habit is at
variance with experience; that in certain cases we are
quite willing to assume a causal connection after a single
instance, and that increased general experience usually
rather weakens than strengthens our power of believing
in a simple causal nexus in any new case presented to
us, by making us more fully aware of the variety of Na-
ture. This was a ruinous criticism to the Sceptical
Doctrine as it was perhaps rather unguardedly expressed
by Hume, but it tells nothing against our theory that a
Cause is merely a certain kind of sign, and in fact
Brown's remark, when rightly considered, throws a very
valuable side-light on that theory.
Why, in fact, are civilized adults less apt to assume
(or make) causal connections at first sight than children
or savages? Simply because their civilization means
little more than this, that they live under more complex
conditions, where the first and most obvious signs are
not found to be those which are most frequently con-
nected with the effect or thing which it is desired to
foretell, and where the frequent necessity for changing


Increasing Difficulty of assuming Causes. 149
the signs (of which we shall speak later) has induced a
reluctance to accept any at first sight. What, again, are
the occasions when civilized man is still able to assume
(or make) a causal connection from a single experience?
Surely they are simply those, whenever the phaenomenon,
which we call the effect, and for whose future coming we
seek a sign, has either never been seen before, or at
least, though the phaenomenon itself may before have
been observed, we have not noticed any phaenomenon
immediately antecedent to its appearance with which we
might connect it. In these cases there is no room for
doubt or choice between divers antecedent phaenomena,
there is only one phaenomenon which can by any means
be made the sign for the future appearance of the phae-
nomenon under observation, and as mankind tries in
every case to get some sign, it must take the only one
which has yet come to hand; subject, of course, to
future alteration, if increased experience suggests some
more convenient sign. In cases, on the other hand, in
which the phaenomenon has been often observed, and in
which there have been several antecedents, but no one
of them has constantly preceded the phaenomenon, man
is aware that no one of these is a convenient or infallible
sign, and that his safest plan is to state them all. Even
this plan is liable to an objection, since so long as we
have got more than one antecedent sign the causal con-
nection is incapable of performing one of its two func-


150 A Discourse on Truth.
tions. It becomes impossible to reason backwards from
the appearance of the effect to the prior or simultaneous
existence of any one Cause. When this is the case Man
is conscious of a deficiency which may hinder, in certain
instances, his rapid self-adjustment to his circumstances,
and will not therefore admit that he has yet found a
satisfactory sign or cause. How he tries to remedy this
deficiency, and whether the process he employs can
properly be called a discovery of a causal connection
between phaenomena, I shall enquire at length in the
next chapter.
We have now to deal with the second half of our sub-
ject, the Nature and History of the notion of Cause as it
is entertained by the majority of mankind. This dis-
cussion, as we pointed out at the beginning of the
Chapter is one which should be carefully separated from
that with which we have up to this point been engaged,
that as to the real nature of the Causal connection.
The Problem, as Hume put it, is this, What is the Im-
pression [Sensation of Emotion] from which our idea of
Cause springs? The question thus barely stated, in my
humble opinion, admitted of no answer, but this was
merely because the question itself was based upon a false
assumption. Hume assumed throughout that all our
ideas were mere reproductions of impressions, so that if
he could prove that there was no impression from which
an idea of Cause might be copied, he would have satis-


Idea of Cause.
factorily proved that no such idea existed.* Now,
as a matter of fact, all our ideas are not barely repro-
ductions of single sensations or emotions. Knowledge
is not merely decaying sense. It is that, it is true, but it
is also something more. By no means the least im-
portant portion of our ideas are those which represent
not directly sensations, but relations between sensations,
or groups of sensations, arranged in a definite order.
We shall try to prove that the common notion of Cause
is merely a reproduction of a certain group of Sensa-
tions in a definite order.
Hume, in discussing the principal sources from which
our idea of Cause, or of Power, which he justly assumes
to be correlative of Cause, might be supposed to
be derived, treats first of the theory that this notion
might be gained from our experience of the action
of the Soul upon the bodily members. To this theory
he answers, ist, that the connection of the Soul with
the body is entirely mysterious; 2nd, that we
cannot always move our limbs by our will; 3rd,
that anatomy teaches us that there is no immediate
action of the will on the limbs, but rather on certain
* In treating of Hume's doctrine of Causation, I have confined myself
entirely to his statement of that doctrine in the Essays. This I have felt
myself bound to do in view of his repudiation of his Treatise on Human
Nature, although his treatment of the subject of Causation in that Treatise
seems to me far more philosophical and satisfactory, than the discussion of the
same subject in his later work (cf. Hume, Treatise on Human Nature,
Part III., Section XIV.).


152 . A Discourse on Truth.
muscles, which ultimately move the limbs. He adds in
a note that the experience of nisus or effort in moving
the limbs cannot give us our notion of power, because
(a) we attribute power to a vast number of things inca-
pable of any effort, e.g., the wind, (/3) 'this sentiment of
an endeavour to overcome resistance has no known
connection with any event; what follows it we know by
experience, but could not know it a priori.' The last
sentence of this note is significant. 'It must be con-
fessed, however, that the animal nisus which we expe-
rience, though it can afford no accurate precise idea of
power, enters very much into that vulgar inaccurate
idea which is formed of it.' (Essay XXXIX., section
VII., second note.)
Now, what is the object of Hume's Enquiry in this
Section? He tells us that it is into the Nature of the
Idea of Causation, and he is about to prove that we
have no idea of it. Yet in this note he talks about
the vulgar inaccurate idea of it. The fact is, that in
this note he seems to be guilty of that confusion
which we are so anxious to avoid, and to mix up
the question, What is a causal connection between
phaenomena? with the entirely different enquiry, What
is the notion which men have of cause or power?
It may well be that this notion is an entirely
inaccurate one, that it does not at all represent the
real nature of the connection, but to assert that the


Humes Criticism.
153
idea is inaccurate in a note or a paragraph which
is intended to prove that it is impossible to form any
such idea whatsoever, is a slip which so logical a
wiiter as Hume could hardly have been guilty of, had
he sufficiently distinguished between these two entirely
different questions.
If Hume only meant to prove that men did not form
a philosophical or accurate idea of Cause, to what pur-
purpose was it to enquire at length into the different
sources from which men might be supposed to get such
an idea? All that could be necessary would be to state
what the common idea of the connection was (and that
there is such a common idea Hume admits in this note),
to compare this common idea with the true nature of the
connection, which he states further on in the same
Essay (though not so clearly or accurately as in the
Treatise on Human Nature), and to show wherein the
idea differed from the reality.
As my theory of the origin of our common notion of
Causation differs not much from that which Hume here
rejects, it will be needful to examine his objections in
detail. The first of them I profess myself unable to
understand. Suppose I say that my notion of Cause is
a complex notion of will followed by motion or effect, to
what purpose is it to say that no one knows the nature
of the connection of the two things, will and muscular
action? My notion is merely of the fact of the sequence


154
A Discourse on Truth.
of which I am directly conscious, and not of any sup-
posed explanation of that sequence. Of course Hume
would not admit the possibility of forming such a
complex notion, but the whole weight of his objection
lies in the assumption of this impossibility, which is
implied but not expressed in his criticism, and which,
had it been stated clearly, men perhaps would not have
accepted with the readiness with which they must needs
acquiesce in the obvious truism, that we cannot hope to
discover what is the ultimate explanation of the connec-
tion between Soul and Body.
The second objection as to the want of absolute cer-
tainty of the obedience of the limbs to the will, can only
be of weight against those who hold that Cause and its
notion both contain the element of invariability, and
not against us, who constantly affirm that the introduc-
tion of this element is unnecessary, and only tends to
confuse the question.
The third objection amounts to this: 'If it were true
that man got his notion of Cause by assuming that
the apparently immediate connection which he is con-
scious of in his own body between will and change or
motion, prevails also in the world around him; then
when he discovered that the connection between a deter-
mination of his will and the motion of his limbs was not
truly immediate but mediate, his notion of Causation
would be entirely destroyed.' Surely this is rather a


Examination of Humes Objections. 155
rash assumption. The compound notion formed ori-
ginally when all men imagined that the connection was
immediate, may be continued when the original sequence
of impressions on which it was founded is broken for a
few persons by the insertion, on some rare occasions, of
certain intermediate impressions (as in the case of the
surgeon who noticed the action of his muscles as coming
between the decision of his will and the action of his
limbs). More especially may this be the case if it be true
that this notion of Cause, founded on the supposed im-
mediate connection between Will and Motion of limbs,
had prevailed and become engrained into the mind of
man for thousands of years. The real force of this third
objection lies, however, in the same implied assumption
which we have noticed with regard to the first—that the
formation of such a complex idea, including two or
more sensations in a definite order, is impossible.
In the note to which we have already alluded, Hume
discusses a modification of the theory which he has
criticised above, but I think he hardly states it fairly.
No reasonable man would assert that the experience of
a nisus or effort could by itself give us the notion of
cause. The theory should rather be stated in this form.
'Our notion of Causation is a representation of these
Impressions or direct experiences, to wit, Will, Effort,
Motion following a regular order.' Not any one of these
separately, nor all in a casual group, but the three in


156
A Discourse on Truth.
the order in which they have always occurred, I hold to
give us our notion of Power or Cause. Apparently
some contemporary or predecessor of Hume held the
same doctrine in a more or less definite form. Unless,
indeed, both the suggestion and its rejection are due
to Hume himself.
Of course this doctrine would at once have been
rejected by Hume, since it asserts the existence of a
complex idea not due to a single impression; but what
other objections has he to urge against it? The first of
his two statements (o) comes to this, That if our notion
of Power or Cause include animal nisus as one of its
elements (he would of course say as the only element),
this notion is not properly applicable to many of those
sequences of phaenomena which we include under the
head of Causation. This observation is perfectly true,
and we shall attempt to give an explanation of the
facts to which it calls our attention, but it at most
proves that our notion of cause is not an adequate
or philosophic one, that it does not really cover all
the cases to which the name is extended. It can in
no way help to demonstrate that the notion itself is non-
existent.
The second objection (y3) only holds against those who
affirm that the notion of Cause is an innate and a priori
one, that is, antecedent to all experience. It can in no
way affect those who merely state that this notion is the


Personal Notion of Cause. 157
reproduction as a complex idea of certain observed
phaenomena in a definite order.
Our assertion then is that the notion of Cause or
Power is a complex idea, consisting of notions of Will,
Effort, and Change combined in that order. The
assertion amounts to this, that in attributing Causation
to all the events of the Universe, we in some vague and
but half-conscious fashion consider that every change in
that universe is produced by forces like those of which
we are sensible in ourselves, and under the same condi-
tions. The problem immediately before us is to explain
how it is that this personal (or at least animal) notion of
Causation has been so. wondrously extended into regions
where it has obviously no proper place.
The solution is not far to seek for us who live in the full
light of Modern Discovery, though for Hume, who stood
upon the outskirts of that glowing plain, the apparent in-
solubility of this question seems to have been the chief
obstacle to his acceptance of the doctrine which we have
stated, since in the last words of that note which we,
have already quoted, he seems almost to concede what
we are about to prove, 'It must, however, be confessed
that the animal nisus, though it can afford no accurate
precise idea of power, enters very much into that vulgar
inaccurate idea which is formed of it.' How would it be
if it were proved to him that this so-called vulgar in-
accurate idea of Power is not merely the only real idea


158 A Discourse on Truth.
which we have of it, but also that this idea, even as it
exists in the uncorrupted consciousness of the vulgar,
possesses not at the present day one tithe of the inten-
sity which belonged to it in the minds of those bygone
generations of men to whom all the world was full of
gods, that is, merely of men's spirits in other shapes?
In those days it was no mere poetical exaggeration, but
the sober expression of ordinary belief, to say,—
'You air that serves me with breath to speak!
You objects that call from diffusion my meanings and give them shape!
You light that wraps me and all things in delicate equable showers!
You paths worn in irregular hollows by the road-sides!
I think you are latent with unseen existences, you are so dear to me.
You flagged walks of the cities! you strong curbs at the edges!
You pinej! yov planks and posts of wharves! you timber-laid sides! you
distant ships!
You doors and ascending steps! you arches!
You grey stones of interminable pavements! you trodden causeways!
From all that has been near you, I believe that you have imparted to your-
selves and now would impart the same secretly to me;
From the living and the dead I think you have peopled your impassive sur-
faces, and the spirits thereof would be evident and amicable with me.'
Mr. Tylor has well shown in his book on Primitive
Culture, how universal is Animism among savage tribes.
By the expression 'Animism' he means the attribution
to portions of inanimate nature capacities and feelings
somewhat similar to our own. He shows how the
savage buries food with his parent, or burns it at his
grave, in order that the spirit or ghost of the food may
give sustenance to the ghost of his father, even as the
real food gave sustenance to that father upon earth.


Animism.
159
Even as all savages believe that man's spirit is some-
thing different and separable from his flesh, so they also
believe that each thing in the world, or at least each
thing which is capable of growth or internal change,
has a separable spirit of its own. A beautiful instance
of this belief is given in that plaintive hymn which the
Indian sings to the spirit or kelah of the rice in times
of blight. I quote from Mr. Tylor.
'O come, rice kelah, come. Come to the field. Come to the rice. . . .
Come from the West. Come from the East. From the throat of the bird,
from the maw of the ape, from the throat of the elephant. . . . From all
granaries come. O rice kelah, come to the rice.'
Tylor, Primitive Culture, vol. i. p. 475.
When this belief in the existence of spirits in each
individual thing was universal, every change was
definitely and directly attributed to the action of
some will or spirit, either within the thing changed, or
external to it. Now man being only directly conscious
of the action of his own will over his limbs, and knowing
that in every case of such action there intervened
between the will and the motion a sensation of effort,
naturally assumed an exact similarity in the mode of
action of the ' spirits' of other things, which were in fact
mere reflected images of his own, and thus blended the
notion of conscious effort with those of will and change
to form his whole complex notion of cause, that is (as he
represented it to himself) of the action of Spirit in the
Universe productive of Change.


160 A Discourse on Truth.
How entirely personal this notion of Cause originally
is, we may gather from several scattered hints. First, the
Greek word for Cause (alrCa) is merely a deflection of the
adjective which asserts personal responsibility. Secondly,
every verb, that is, every statement of change, is primarily
personal, in other words, it asserts the interposition of
some will which through an effort produces that change.
It may be fairly doubted whether the so-called imper-
sonal verbs, even to this day, are really impersonal in
the notion which they express—whether the 'it' is not
always some vague quasi-personal motive power. I
must confess that so far as I can analyse my own
thoughts on the subject, there is always some such
notion lying latent in my mind when I make use of any
of these speciously impersonal verbs.
This notion of Causation depending upon the universal
primitive belief of the existence of Spirit in all things
was naturally and logically in the light of that belief
extended to all change in the universe. But the notion
did not die with the gradual destruction of its parent
belief. Neither is this to be wondered at. There is
hardly a word of anything like wide significance in any
modern language, which does not carry about with it
vague ghosts of beliefs which once clothed it with vivid
life, but which are now long since dead. Are not
almost all the terms of Moral Science meaningless
without the assumption of the doctrine, long ago dis-


Animistic Metaphors. 161
carded, of a local position and corporeal constitution of
the Soul?
"Yes deep within and deeper yet
The rankling shafts of conscience hide.
Quick let the swelling eye forget
The tears that in the heart abide."
Metaphor, say you. Doubtless; but metaphor is
meaningless unless we see or can imagine some like-
ness between the things compared, and almost all the
finer metaphors refer our present consciousness of sen-
sations or emotions to former explanations of these, or
beliefs about them. We still call the sun Phcebus's car,
and the moon pale Cynthia, but neither of these expres-
sions has absolutely any meaning, except in reference
to half-forgotten polytheistic legends. Why should our
hearts be stirred when the poet, exclaims—
'Call it not vain ; they do not err
Who say that when a Poet dies,
Mute Nature mourns her worshipper,
And celebrates his obsequies.'?
Can any one doubt that the feeling of delight aroused
by such lines as these depends upon the revival of the
half-dead beliefs which still cling around the words?
And we can now see why every poetical metaphor
which attempts to give life to a modern creation or
invention, always seems to us strained and forced.
Fancy still clings to the places once inhabited by
belief, but refuses to stir a jot beyond those limits. In
M


162 A Discourse on Truth.
the days when mankind believed that all things which
had motion were also endowed with conscious life,
steam engines were not. The poet who attributes life
to a steam-engine is therefore guilty of an anachronism
of imagination, and our fancy refuses to follow him.
Our whole notion of Causation is now one vast meta-
phor; that is, a vague clinging of the imagination to
that which Reason has long ago discarded. Hume,
looking at the notion solely from the side of Reason,
found in it absolutely no content. Unfortunately, on
his principle of deriving all our ideas solely from the
sensational experience of the individual man, he was
thereupon forced to declare, that since a reasonable
man in civilized life could find no direct experience on
which he could build an idea answering to the word
Cause, there was therefore absolutely no meaning
attached to that word. He was thus obliged to run
counter to the common consciousness of mankind,
which declares to each of us that we have still some
notion when we pronounce the word; although Reason
declares that that notion when analysed will be found
utterly inapplicable to the facts before us, and thus
forces the notion to hide itself in the background, and
to clothe itself round with misty vagueness.
To us who hold that it is possible for beliefs and
tendencies to belief to survive in persons whose whole
individual experience is in opposition to those beliefs,


163
Hume's apparent dilemma presents no difficulty what-
soever, and we may feel confident, in our respect for the
greatest thinker that ever arose in England, that had he
before him the evidence of two kinds which we now
have (that, to wit, as to Primitive Animism and that as
to the inheritance of beliefs), he could not so slightly
have dismissed in a note the hypothesis which contains
the germ of the true theory.
We have now discussed at length (a) the real nature
of the causal connection between phaenomena, ($), the
notion which mankind form of that connection. We
have seen that this notion, although once by aid of the
doctrine of Animism it covered sufficiently the whole
field of change, is now properly applicable to but a
small portion of those changes to which the name of
Causation is ordinarily applied, and that the conscious-
ness of this fact has given to the notion of Cause a
vagueness which is continually increasing.
In the next two chapters we shall discuss the methods
by which mankind discovers (or manufactures) and
makes use of the causal connections between phae-
nomena.
M 2


CHAPTER V.
ON INDUCTION.
An induction is usually defined as the progress from
a number of detailed facts to the universal law which
is common to all those facts, and forms the explanation
of them, or more vaguely as a progress from the less
general to the more general, from the particular to the
universal. That this method of observing and col-
lecting single instances, and by the comparison of them
evolving a general law, is the most important, though by
no means the only, function of science, is sufficiently
obvious. It behoves us, then, to give a rational account
of this process in accordance with our theory that a
cause is a mere sign. If we fail to do so satisfactorily
we may as well throw that theory to the winds at once.
Our task then in this chapter is to enquire what is the
exact portion which Induction aims at performing of the
great work of fitting man for his circumstances, and
how far it succeeds in this aim.
With the savage, whose circumstances are compara-
tively simple, it is doubtful whether, as a rule, any


The Method of the Savage.
165
inductive processes are necessary. The first time he
finds a change in one thing, followed by a change in
another, he is at once ready to assume that next time he
sees the first change the second will follow, or, as he
expresses it, in his animistic phraseology, that the first
thing is the cause of the change in the second. (Not
the change in the first thing, be it noted, for as we have
seen, his notion of cause is strictly personal, and the
thing is for him a person.) He will assume this con-
nection immediately after one instance, and will not
have the slightest desire to count up cases, though, no
doubt, a repetition of those cases will strengthen his
expectation according to the principles which we have
clearly laid down. So, too, with a child, though in
his case the simplicity is perhaps marred by inherited
tendencies of doubt. 'A burnt child dreads the fire,'
and dreads equally all fires. He will not only carefully
avoid the kitchen grate against which he has fallen, but
as long as his memory is fresh you will not succeed in
inducing him to play at snap-dragon.
But the experience both of the child and of the
savage race will widen. Both will be exposed to more
variable circumstances, and will meet with frequent
cases where the original sign has not been followed by
the effect; and, again, where the effect has been pre-
ceded not by that sign, but by some other. The child
will, step by step, be transferred from the comparative


A Discourse on Truth.
uniformity of the nursery to the more varied life of
school and the wilder vortex of the world. The savage,
from the life of the hunter, where a foot-mark on the
snow or the sand always denoted the proximity of a
definite animal, will, as population advances, be com-
pelled to betake himself to the life of the shepherd or
the agriculturist; he will be forced to watch the varying
and uncertain signs of the skies, the doubtful indications
of disease among his flock, and the varieties in the cha-
racter of the soil, with their capricious results.
For this increased complexity of experience new pro-
cesses will be necessary. If he has noticed that some
one phaenomenon is preceded in all cases of his ex-
perience by some one of two or three phaenomena,
he will probably be content to treat all these two or
three antecedent phaenomena indifferently as the signs
or 'Causes' of the subsequent phaenomena, though, as
> we have seen, he will thus be rendered unable to per-
form one of the two functions which the discovery of
Causal links renders possible, that is, the arguing
backward from the observed presence of the effect to the
simultaneous or,immediately precedent existence of the
Cause, an operation which can only be performed with
certainty when there is but one cause for one effect.
If, however, as his experience increases, the number
of phaenomena which he has noticed as antecedents
of any one phaenomenon or 'effect,' become consider-


Increased Complexity of surroundings. 167
able, no one of these phaenomena being repeated in all
cases, he will be reduced to a difficulty. If he pursued
his former plan, and treated each of these phaenomena
indifferently as signs of the effect, he would run a
double danger. In the first place in attempting to
reason from the presence of the cause to that of the
effect, he might, if the causes were numerous, forget
one of them altogether, and omit to expect the effect.
In the second place, when he observed the effect, he
would necessarily perform slowly and with considerable
risk of failure the task of running over in his mind all
the observed antecedents, the presence of one of which
either at the moment or immediately before, the sensa-
tion of the effect should lead him to infer. The one
he omitted might be the exact one which was actually
present on the occasion in question, and his omission
to consider it on that occasion might give rise to an
erroneous course of action.
Supposing, on different occasions, when his dog had
shaken its head violently, he had discovered that it had
either a drop of water in the interior of the ear, or a flea
on the outer skin, or canker, or some hair turned in-
wards into the orifice; and some other time, when his
dog shook his head, was to think of only three of these
possible antecedents, omitting, for instance, the third,
his treatment of his dog would not be that best suited to
keep him in perfect order. Moreover the fact of having


168 A Discourse on Truth.
to run over a number of possible antecedents must
necessarily produce a slowness and uncertainty of
action, both of which are always harmful, and may in
certain cases be dangerous. Still more will this be the
case if his knowledge of the possible antecedents be not
due to his own observation but, at least in part, depend
upon information received from others. If a man shall
tell me that after a warm rain, or where sheep have been
kept, or where there are rings in the grass, mushrooms
are wont to grow, I having no experience of mush-
rooms other than that of Seeing them after they are
picked, I am very likely to forget a portion of my in-
formation and so, perhaps, miss my mushrooms.
In all cases, therefore, in which the number of ante-
cedent signs exceeded one or two, man found a need of
some short-hand method by which he might connect in
his own memory, and convey to his fellows, a know-
ledge of all the observed antecedent signs of any phaeno-
menon, without going through the risky and laborious
process of enumerating these signs. This need, and the
process which supplied it, are respectively the parent
and the primitive form of Scientific Induction.
The problem before him was this. Given a single
phaenomenon which, on different occasions on which I
have observed it, has been preceded by some one of a
number of other phaenomena, each one of these occurring
on some one occasion at least without any of the others;


Artificial Causes.
169
in what form am I to cast the whole of this complex
and varying experience in order that it may be most
useful to myself and to those to whom I communicate it,
and most easy to remember in its full extent?
The first answer which might be given to this, ques-
tion is not far to seek. If the observed antecedent
phaenomena were complex and contained a simple ele-
ment which were common to all of them and to no other
observed phaenomena, this simpler element might be
taken as the connecting link between them, and in order
to convey knowledge to my friend I should not give him
a list of the phaenomena which were followed by the
effect, but merely mention the one mark or portion which
each of these in common possessed. This mark would
then in future constitute, both for him and for me, the
sign or cause of the subsequent phaenomenon. The
appearance of a ghost is, according to different stories,
preceded by a variety of facts, but a constant element
in these antecedent facts is the unhappiness or disquiet
of some dead person; this, then, may be taken as the
connecting link between all the stories, or the cause of
the ghostly apparition.
To put it symbolically, we have observed in past time
A, B, C, D, etc., all followed by F, where A, B, C, D,
etc., are too numerous to be conveniently enumerated or
retained in the memory. Now if A, B, C, D, etc., be
complex phaenomena which have- a common element,


A Discourse on Truth.
E, which does not belong to any other observed phaeno-
mena than those followed by F, we obviously throw our
knowledge of those sequences of which F is the last term,
into simple form by saying E is always followed by F,
or E is the cause of F.
But the number of cases in which we can resort to
such a simple course as this is extremely small. We
shall very rarely find that our observed complex ante-
cedent phaenomena have such a simple element which is
common to them and them only; and moreover, in many
cases, the antecedent phaenomena will be (at least as far
as our observation goes) absolutely simple, so that it
will be hopeless to look for a connecting element. In
these cases—and they are practically the only ones with
which Science deals—a more elaborate and not by any
means equally satisfactory method has to be followed.
That method proceeds on this wise.
Each one of the antecedent observed phaenomena
which we wish to connect must necessarily be an attri-
bute or change of some thing. Now although the phae-
nomena themselves have nought in common which will
serve for a connecting link, yet the things to which they
are referred must necessarily not only have an attribute
in common, but also some attribute which belongs to
nought else yet observed, except those things which are
also possessed of some other attribute, or capable of
some change, which has in past experience been fol-


Artificial Causes.
171
lowed by the effect, whose causal law we seek to estab-
lish. I say necessarily because the number of attributes
which every single thing has is potentially infinite ac-
cording to the varieties of circumstances to which we
expose that thing. Our experience then being merely
finite, we may by continual variations of circum-
stances, and rejections of those attributes which are
either not common to all the things which we wish to
connect, or which extend beyond them, eventually arrive
at one which exactly suits our purpose—which belongs
to all the observed things which have any one of the
phaenomena that have been observed to precede the
effect and to no other known things whatsoever. Here,
as before, though with even less propriety, we shall call
the newly discovered common link the Cause of that
phaenomenon, whose real or proximate causes are
changes or attributes of those things who have that
attribute which we use as a link in common.
The diagram on the next page will throw light on the
process.
Here F is the phaenomenon whose cause we wish to
discover; A, B, C, are its observed immediate antece-
dents, which seem more closely connected with it than
any other antecedents whatsoever, but each one of
which has been observed as an antecedent in cases
where neither of the other two have appeared, r,, r2, etc.,
are the things to which the phaenomena A, B, C, etc.,


172
A Discourse on Truth.
are referred or belong; (acocj)-), (/3^</>-), (yx<H, etc-, are
other observed or discoverable attributes of r,, r4, etc.
Now $ is common to t„ r2, and t3; so long then as
A, B, C, or some one of them are always observed as
antecedents of F, we shall use <f> as a connecting link
between them, and say that <f> is the cause of F.
Now in any intelligible sense of the word 'Cause,' </> is
not the cause of F. Up to the point which our experience
has at present reached, it has never been even a real
antecedent, far less an unconditional antecedent of F.
It is merely a phaenomenon which under certain peculiar
circumstances may be made subsequent to each one of
the things to some change of each of which F is itself
subsequent. To say then that <p is the cause of F is
merely a very concise form of stating that all those
things which have one attribute (f> have also another
attribute (not the same in each) which is the real cause
or immediate antecedent of F.


Experiment. 173
Experiment in almost all cases consists in putting a
number of observed things which have a common in-
direct effect into a number of unusual circumstances, in
order to discover an attribute which is common to these
things, and to these only, and which may therefore be
used as the connecting link between them.
Now the use of such a cause or sign as this is
open to several objections. In the first place it is of
little or no service to the unlearned. It does not
usually enable them to distinguish those things which
according to past experience may be expected to be
followed by the Effect from any other things whatso-
ever. It is usually some recondite attribute whose
existence can only be demonstrated in laboratories, and
whose very nature is frequently inconceivable to the
majority, e.g. the arrangement of crystals as a cause of
any of the obvious properties of things. In the second
place, even to the scientific men, the newly discovered
phaenomenon has never been presented in order of
sensation as the antecedent of that whose cause it is
said to be, and therefore the act of thinking from the
one to the other will always be an artificial one and
must be performed rather by means of ideas of the
words than by those of the phaenomena, since the con-
nection between the phaenomena themselves is only an
indirect one, with a considerable number of intermediate
steps, which would tax and impede thought.


174 A Discourse on Truth.
Now, although the verbal connection is important for
holding the two phaenomena together in the mind, it
has, as it were, to be retranslated into ideas of that
which the words signify, before it can be of any value
for the purposes of life, and here the retranslation will
involve the mental enumeration of the list of things
whose attribute the artificial link or cause is; an
enumeration in which there is, of course, all the old
danger of error. So that the newly-established connec-
tion rather conceals than gets rid of the difficulty
arising from the increasing variety of experience. The
so-called discovery of cause is in such cases the finding
out, not of causes at all, but of links wherewith to bind
together causes.
There are certain cases, however, where we may,
perhaps, get a direct connection between and F,
and thus a real natural expectation of a certain degree
that F will follow <p. In such a case we have really
A, B, C, and <f> in the various cases as direct antece-
dents or causes of F, and we have also <f> as a subse-
quent possible sensation to the things to which A, B,
C, belong, so that $ is partly a real cause and partly
a mere artificial one of the whole number of appear-
ances of F.
In such cases the mind, in its natural desire for
a strong expectation and quick action, strives, and,
imagination aiding it, to a great extent succeeds in


Counteracting Causes. 175
extending its notion of $ as real cause or antecedent
of F to those cases in which it is merely an artificial
connecting link, and it is ready to extend this notion
to any new things whereof <j> be discovered as a sub-
sequent phaenomenon, that is to expect that these things,
or some change of them, will be followed by F.
Yet in many cases it must needs discover that other
before-unexamined things r4 and r5, both of which have
the attribute or potential subsequent phaenomenon <p, can
by no known process be made the antecedents, either
direct or indirect, of F. Still, if <j> has been discovered
capable of binding together a great number of things,
r,, t4, etc., upon some change of each one of which F
follows, we shall be very much disinclined to abandon
the formula, "<j> is the cause of F," and to begin afresh
a search for some new attribute which will be exactly
sufficient] to bind together all known things which are
indirectly followed by F, and those only. If we have only
one case (r4) in which a thing which has the atribute <j> is
not followed by F, we shall content ourselves by saying
that among the attributes of r4 there must be some
counteracting cause to <t>, that is, something which we
might, if we knew it, use as a sign that a given result
was not about to occur in cases otherwise similar to
those in which we have known it occur.
As far as our present experience goes, we might take
any one of the attributes of r4 which is not possessed by


176
A Discourse on Truth.
r,, t2, etc., for this sign or counteracting cause. But
from the fact that our choice is perfectly indifferent be-
tween a number of attributes, and that both cause and
counteracting cause are purely artificial, and invented
for convenient classification, we are apt, for the time, to
reserve our judgment until we see whether there be
not other things r5, etc., which have the attribute </>,
but are not followed by F, in order that, if such
other things exist, we may look out for some com-
mon attribute between them and r4 by means of
which we may tie together all the things from whose
presence, although they have the attribute <£, we shall
not expect nor be able to induce the appearance of
phaenomenon F. If v be such a common attribute
between t4, t5> etc., we shall call v the counteracting
cause of </> in the same artificial sense in which is the
cause of F.
From what we have said above as to the potential
infinity of the attributes of any one thing, it will follow
that we shall always be able to discover some such
attribute v which shall be exactly sufficient to tie
together all those things which, according to our
present experience, have the attribute <f> but are not
followed by F. If, again, we found a phaenomenon
G which was followed by F, and which was refer-
able to something r6 which had the qualities e v <p,
etc., we might say that either e, or some other


Warrant for assumption of rough Uniformity. 177
attribute of r6, was a counteracting cause of v, and thus
left <ji free to work. But when freed from all animistic
associations, this statement, like the rest, would be
merely equivalent to an expression of our intention to
take e or some other more suitable attribute for tying
together those cases in our experience where things
having both the attributes v and <j> were indirectly
followed by F.
In no case have we any logical right to extend
our assertion beyond our experience, though in all
cases we must necessarily extend our expectation
beyond those limits, and must therefore be frequently
disappointed. We have no right to say a priori whether
any newly-observed thing (r7), which has the attributes
ripvevQ . . . will or will not be capable of being
the indirect cause of F.
We know, however, generally, that, so long as Man
is to exist on the planet, by far the greater number
of his expectations must be in accordance with facts.
Were it not so, he would necessarily disappear, and
his place be taken by something which was more
frequently right in its expectation of proximate events,
and therefore in its adjustment of itself to them. We
are, therefore, philosophically justified in assuming pro-
visionally—what we must needs expect—that the vary-
ing attributes of the newly-observed thing are unim-
portant as far as its connection with F is concerned,
N


178
A Discourse on Truth.
that they are neither causes nor counteracting causes.
The assumption amounts precisely to this, that r7 will
be followed by the same phaenomena as r6, which it
resembles in many points.
If we are disappointed in our expectation in this special
case it will of course be open to us to repeat our process
and choose a new counteracting cause of e, but after a
few such steps we shall get such a confusion of causes,
counteracting and cross-counteracting each other, that
our classification will be valueless, and we shall there-
fore reluctantly discard 0 as a link between all the
things which are followed by F, and beginning anew
with our wider experience, look out for some attribute
which is common to r6, r3, r2, 7,-, etc., all those things
which are capable of being followed by F, but not to
t4, r5, r7, etc., which, although possessed of a number
of similar attributes, are never followed by F. That
such a link may be found, we must always firmly
believe, but the difficulty of finding it will be always,
roughly speaking, proportionate to the number of cases
to be considered. As long, then, as we know that the
phaenomena A, B, C, G, etc., are all followed by F, but
have no link by which we may tie together the former
detached phaenomena, we say that the connection be-
tween each of these phaenomena and F is merely casual,
that is, that we are still seeking for some such connect-
ing link. Thus, in a very valuable sense, is that maxim


Chance and Cause. 179
of the old Philosophy true which asserts that Chance is
but Undiscovered Cause, or, as we may paraphrase it,
a sequence of two phaenomena which we are at present
unable to connect with several other observed sequences
which have the same second term or Effect.
Of course all I have said as to the continually existing
possibility of our finding things which have the attri-
bute <j), without being followed by F, is equally appli-
cable to the chance of our finding sequences of phaeno-
mena which have F for the last term, but whereof none
of the antecedent phaenomena can be referred to any-
thing which has the attribute </>. F may be preceded by
phaenomena H, K, etc.; now these phaenomena may be
changes in things r8, t9, which neither of them possess
the attribute <f>. The remedy here, as before, is either
to admit two or more causes for one phaenomenon, which
is inconvenient, or to discard <f>, and seek a new and
more catholic connecting link.
An important point which so far as I know has not
been noticed by any writer on the subject, is this. As
our bundles of antecedent phaenomena become more
and more extended, the connecting link between them
becomes ever more and more constantly some attribute
which has not at first been observed to belong to any
one of them. The reason of this is not hard to discern.
That of which we take first count at the dawn of
thought, is the difference between two things. As our
N 2


180 A Discourse on Truth.
reason develops, we observe next those qualities of
some few things wherein they resemble, differing from
all the rest. Very late indeed do we proceed to take
notice of those wide-extended attributes which belong
to a vast multitude of things that have nothing else in
common. Yet it is precisely these last attributes which
are most useful in linking together extended groups of
causal sequences, or, as the current phrase goes, estab-
lishing universal Laws of Nature. When, therefore, we
have long been accustomed to discover that the most
important connecting links or causes (in the artificial
sense) are usually only hit upon late in the course of an
investigation, and that even after their discovery they
are not often obvious at first sight to the casual observer,
as he simply looks upon any one of the things whose
common attribute they are, we soon get into the way of
imagining that because the most widely applicable links
are recondite, a recondite link is preferable, and more
likely to cover new cases than an obvious one, where
both are equally applicable to the cases already known.
It is hardly needful to say that such a belief is alto-
gether without logical warrant. Yet can we now never
rest contented with an obvious link, but always feel dis-
satisfied till we have found a recondite one. Thus, for
instance, if we found that all brown cows had certain
peculiarities in the quality of their milk, we should
consider it childish to say that the brown colour was


Preference for recondite Attributes. 181
the cause of the peculiarity, though this explanation
would most naturally suggest itself to the uncorrupted
intelligence of the savage. We should say that both
the brown colour, and the quality of the milk were
caused by some hidden inner attribute of the cow.
When we had at last discovered some such hidden inner
quality, that is some attribute common to all brown
cows and to these only, we should plume ourselves
greatly on our advance in science and discovery of true
cause in the place of mere empirical connection.
Of course, if we could ever make this hidden inner
attribute a real antecedent to the production of brown
colour, or again to peculiarities in the quality of the
milk, we should be quite right in taking it as the cause
of either phaenomenon. So again, if the inner attribute
was possessed by other cows, or any animals of another
species, which had all of them the peculiarity of milk,
but not all of them the brown colour, this attribute,
although it might in no case be a real antecedent of the
peculiarity of the milk, would be a convenient artificial
cause. But in many cases we are neither able to make
the inner and later discovered attribute a true antece-
dent, nor to extend it to cases which will not be covered
by some such obvious external attribute as that of
brown colour, and we call the inner and less obvious
attribute the cause, merely because it is inner and later
discovered—a reason which appears sufficiently childish


182
A Discourse on Truth.
at first sight. Yet is our preference neither altogether
irrational, nor at all meaningless. It is a result and
indication of the history and progress of man, a pro-
gress in which he has passed from the use of simple and.
obvious signs, to the employment of those deep-hidden
and hardly-attained attributes which are yet in the
majority of cases most convenient as artificial links by
which he may connect a number of otherwise detached
sequences of phaenomena.
This continual searching for some inner and hidden
attribute, as that which will most probably form the
best artificial cause to bind together a large number of
sequences of phaenomena with a common last term or
effect, throws light on that observation of Brown which
we have referred to above (p. 148). Children and savages
naturally assume a causal link after the experience of a
few sequences, because they are contented with some
obvious attribute for the first term, sign, or cause.
Civilized men, not being contented with such an ob-
vious sign, search still for some hidden attribute which
they hope may be extended to connect a larger number
of sequences than can be held together by the simple
and easily observed true antecedent which the un-
learned at once seize upon. The civilized man, there-
fore, proceeds more slowly and cautiously in his dis-
covery or choice of causes, precisely in proportion to his
civilization, which by suggesting to him the advantage


Recapitulation. 183
of wide-extending laws or connections of causal se-
quences, has forced upon him the use of those hidden
attributes by which alone such wide connections can
usually be accomplished.
Let us go back for a moment over the ground we
have traversed in these two last chapters, in order that
we may be better prepared to solve the crucial question,
Does our view of Causation and of Induction diminish
or altogether deny the value of Scientific Induction?
We have pointed out that a cause in its original and
most strict sense is an antecedent phaenomenon which
is used as a sign; not necessarily an invariable ante-
cedent nor in any sense an unconditional antecedent,
but at least a very frequent precursor, and probably one
which in all cases within the experience of him, who
first uses it as a sign or cause, has been followed by the
effect; that a cause in its second and more artificial,
but probably at present more frequent, signification is
an attribute which is not, strictly speaking, the antece-
dent of the effect, but which belongs to a number of
heterogeneous things, each of which things has in past
time more or less frequently manifested some phaeno-
menon (not the same in each) which has been directly
followed by the effect; that Induction in the Scientific
sense is devoted to the discovery of these connecting
attributes; that finally this Scientific Induction has a
somewhat unreasonable but perfectly natural and


184 A Discourse on Truth.
accountable preference for internal and recondite attri-
butes rather than for external and obvious ones, and is
loath to allow to the latter the name of Causes.
It seems, then, that Induction at all events is limited
to the task which Hobbes and the pure Nominalists con-
sider the sole function of Science—that of tying things up
into bundles. At first sight the occupation does not
seem a very honourable or worthy one. But when we
consider it in relation to that process which we affirm
to be the main end and aim of all science and all en-
quiry—the adjustment of man to his circumstances—we
shall easily see that this bundle-tying forms no small
nor insignificant portion of that vast and ever-changing
labour.
The use of such bundle-tying is two-fold; first, in aid-
ing the memory of the individual investigator; secondly,
in enabling him to convey the result of his researches
to others in a.more convenient form. Both of these two
benefits greatly facilitate that quickness and certainty of
action which renders Man not the passive victim but, in
some sense, the moderator and king of the turbulent
multitude of phaenomena which press ever upon him.
The second benefit is, however, by far the more im-
portant of the two, and with this we are chiefly con-
cerned. A full description and analysis of the process
of an individual investigator, and the method of his
communication of his discovery to his fellow-men, will


Bundle-tying.
185
enable us to see more definitely both what Induction
can and does perform for us, and what are those func-
tions which she vainly claims to fulfil. We shall then
understand how enormous is the power of the Inductive
Method in increasing the fitness of man for his circum-
stances, and shall perceive at the same time how utterly
impotent that method is when it aims at achieving ab-
solute certainty, or indeed at arriving at any new truth
in the strict sense of that term.
Suppose that any man perceived that (a) the addition -
of fresh fuel; (/3) the action of the bellows; (y) a frosty
day, all increased the flame of the fire, he might at first
be contented with observing that each of these phaeno-
mena was a cause of the increase of flame, and whenso-
ever he might wish to produce a cheerier blaze might
make use of any one of these three phaenomena accord-
ing to the facility of procuring them. In the same way
whensoever he noticed the occurrence of any of the three
he might expect the result to be repeated. But if, in-
stead of merely three observed antecedent phaenomena,
he discovered, as his experience extended, a very large
number of such changes, each of which was indifferently
the antecedent of an increase of flame, he would soon
find it hard to remember all the possible direct antece-
dents or real causes, and might absolutely omit to take
into account on any given occasion the only one which
at the moment it was in his power to reproduce.


A Discourse on Truth.
If, however, he were able to discover that in each case
of the increase of blaze somewhat had been added to the
fire which, on analysis, was found to contain oxygen, he
would sum up the result of his varied experience by
saying that all things containing oxygen and added to
a fire produced a blaze. (I assume that he had had no
contradictory experience.) He would probably go
further than this, and say that oxygen was the cause of
the increase of blaze. But this would be a mere short-
hand way of expressing his former proposition, and it
would by no means necessarily follow that he had been
able yet to make oxygen a real cause, that is, a noticed
antecedent. The second proposition does indeed ex-
press something more than the first, but the additional
meaning, when duly analysed, asserts nought whatso-
ever about the observed phaenomena or their relation,
but merely an intention of the speaker. When I say
'all things containing oxygen when added to a fire pro-
duce an increase of flame,' I merely sum up my past
experience, and am conscious that if, after more ex-
tended experience, I find a thing containing oxygen
which does not increase flame, I shall have to discard
or qualify my assertion. When, on the other hand, I
affirm that oxygen is the cause of the increase of flame,
I add to my former assertion the declaration, or at
least suggestion, that in case I find a contradictory in-
stance, I shall not discard or modify my formula, but


Analysis of Instance. 187
shall seek for a "counteracting cause" by means of
which to classify the present contradictory instance
with others which may be hereafter observed.
It is obvious that in this case the general induction
'Oxygen is the cause of the increase of flame' contains
no new truth in addition to the special observed
sequences. The known facts are identically the same
as they were before the promulgation of the formula
which binds them together, and the formula will ex-
press to each individual exactly the number of varying
sequences with increase of flame for last term, which he
already knows; neither more nor less.
It is true that by most individuals it will be taken as
expressing somewhat more than this—they will under-
stand it somewhat after this fashion, 'AH the cases
which I have noticed where flame has been increased
have had among their antecedents the addition to the
fire of a substance which I know or believe has been
found on analysis to contain oxygen or to promote
the consumption thereof, and I further believe that
there are a great number of other cases unlike those
which I have noticed, which have been investigated
by scientific men, where also oxygen has always been
discovered on analysis of the substance added to the
fire; I hold still further that I am not likely to meet
with any case which is unlike those which have been
investigated by others, since my circumstances are far


188 A Discourse on Truth.
less varied than those of my informants, taken as a
whole.'
But all this addition does not in any way spring
from the special induction; it is the general formula
of ignorance willing to believe. Moreover it asserts
no positive belief of any kind as to the matter in
hand, but merely the intention of believing when the
occasion arises. At present it is absolutely without
content, it has merely a potential value and in this
potential state induction must leave it. How this
potential and vague tendency may be converted into a
positive belief of a definite value we shall inquire in the
next chapter. For the present we may be content to
notice that, if in any way a new substance be presented
to me in which I have reason to believe oxygen is con-
tained or from which it may be generated, I shall at once
assume that this substance is one of those which have
already been investigated by scientific men, and that
its addition to the fire will increase the flame. I am
thus able to appropriate to myself the whole of the ex-
perience of others. It is true, that even supposing that
I have hit upon no hitherto unnoticed substance, yet
that its addition to the fire may not in any given case
produce an increase of flame since the whole of the
immediately antecedent circumstances will never be
quite the same as in any preceding case, and there is no
absolute fixity in nature. But this danger is common


Function of Induction.
to all science and its nature and limits we have already
discussed.
We may now clearly and boldly state that the chief
function of Induction is the furnishing of formulae for
communication to others not exactly of beliefs, but of
tendencies to believe when the occasion presents itself;
that this function is an eminently important one, but
that neither it nor any other function of Induction is
concerned with the acquisition of absolutely certain
knowledge.


CHAPTER VI.
OF SYLLOGISM AND DEDUCTIVE REASONING.
In the preceding chapters we have discussed the
nature of universal propositions—those I mean which
are thought to be true, not of any individual or number
of individual things, nor again at any given time or
times; but, throughout the whole range of human expe-
rience and expectation, of whatsoever individuals have
borne, do bear, or shall be found to bear certain marks.
We have seen that all such universal propositions, as
indeed all propositions whatsoever, may be divided into
two great classes—those which assert the possession of
an attribute by a thing, and those which affirm a causal
connection between two pheenomena. We may further
have noticed that each of these two large classes of
propositions may be subdivided by a parallel which will
cross both. We have simple and natural attributive
propositions which assert the possession of such or such
a quality by some real natural kind, and simple and
natural causal propositions where there is a real and


Propositions Simple and Artificial. 191
observable constant succession between two pheno-
mena. So again we have artificial attributive proposi-
tions, which assert some property of an artificial kind,
made up of several natural kinds, and artificial causal
propositions where the ' cause' is not the real antece-
dent, but merely a convenient connecting link between
several such real antecedents. The distinction between
natural and artificial propositions of the two great
classes is all-important for the due understanding and
solution of the vexed question of the functions and value
of the syllogism.
For see now; suppose I say all apples have pips;
this thing which I hold in my hand is an apple, there-
fore it has pips. It is obvious that anyone to whom
the first of my premisses had any meaning would at once
know, without any need of my second proposition, that
the thing which I held in my hand had pips. He
would be aware that in making the first assertion I
necessarily included the apple which I held in my hand,
and my third proposition or conclusion would express to
him no new thought, but merely a part of the complex
general thought expressed by that first proposition.
But let me say, All mammals have lungs; the whale
is a mammal; therefore the whale has lungs. Now
was it necessary that the man who made and attached
a definite sense to my first proposition, should know
immediately on affirming it, that the whale had lungs?


192
A Discourse on Truth.
I assert that it was not. All that his first proposition
meant was this; that, in his own experience and read-
ing, no animal had been met with which gave suck to
its young, but which was without lungs, and that in his
belief the wider experience of others had also met with
no contradictory instance, that he was therefore ready
to believe that any new case which was presented to
him would not be new in the general experience of
investigators, and would therefore conform to this rule.
When he stated or heard the proposition, he would run
over rapidly in his mind a number of mammals in which
the whale might not be included, either because he was
utterly unaware at the time that the whale was a
mammal, or because he did not remember it at the
moment. The conjunction then of the two proposi-
tions 'all mammals have lungs,' and 'the whale is a
mammal,' will induce him to pass from the thought
whale to the thought of the possession of lungs.
Now this transition or connection of thought may
never have occurred to him, even if he knew that the
whale was a mammal, and can never have occurred
to him if he did not before know it. In either of these
two cases then, the syllogism or deductive proof will
have given him a connection between two ideas which
he did not before possess, and, as knowledge is agreed
to consist in connections between ideas, will have added
a new item to the sum of his knowledge. The thought,


Propositions Simple and Artificial. 193
the whale has lungs, is not necessarily included amongst
the thoughts suggested by the artificial proposition, all
mammals have lungs.
The same distinction holds for simple and artificial
causal propositions. The simple causal proposition is
an assertion of real visible connection between phaeno-
mena, and he who asserts it must in the very asser-
tion think it to be true of all similar phaenomena what-
soever. If I say, all magnets attract iron; this is a
magnet, therefore this attracts iron, my conclusion is
obviously a mere portion of my first proposition (putting
aside any difficulties there may be in discovering what
is and what is not a magnet, as, for instance, if we limit
ourselves to those red-coated horse-shoes from which we
all learnt as children one of our first lessons in experi-
mental science). If, however, I shall say all oxygenous
substances increase combustion, or, more shortly, oxygen
is a cause of increased combustion, it is almost impos-
sible that at the moment of making the proposition I
should run over in my mind, even if I knew them, all
the substances which contain oxygen. All I can do is
to register an intention of expecting that any substance
that I shall discover to contain oxygen will be favour-
able to combustion; any such proposition as, Substance
A or B contains oxygen, will call this intention into
execution, and give rise to the conclusion, Substance
A or B is favourable to combustion, which, if A and B
o


i94
A Discourse on Truth.
were not among the substances which I ran over in my
mind when I enunciated the general proposition, will
represent a new connection of ideas, and therefore a
new piece of knowledge.
We have arrived then at this point. Deductive Rea-
soning or Syllogism is absolutely meaningless when
applied to simple and natural universal propositions,
whether of causation or of attribution. With regard
to complex universal propositions it may be, and fre-
quently is, useful in giving to the individual enquirer
knowledge which he did not before possess. Whether
he be said to have before potentially possessed it or no,
makes nothing to the matter. Potential knowledge
is actual ignorance, it has in fact no more reality
than that potential existence of the ancients which
modern philosophers so scornfully reject. Why these
same philosophers should retain the equally mythical
potential knowledge passes my comprehension—unless
indeed it be that this latter myth serves for the greater
glorification of the modern idol Induction, by filching
for its adornment the due honours of its old-fashioned
rival, Syllogism. As a mode of instruction, or for the
conveyance of knowledge to others, Syllogism is all-
important, and, in fact, by far the greater part of
teaching is conducted by means of it.
But can it do no more than this? Is it capable in any
way of enlarging the stock of human knowledge con-


Can Deduction give us new Truths?
195
sidered as a whole? This question is an entirely dif-
ferent one from that which we have hitherto discussed,
and should be kept entirely separate, which unfor-
tunately it rarely if ever has been in discussions of the
subject. Deduction might properly be called a process
for acquiring knowledge, even although its functions
were limited to communicating to the individual enquirer
facts which he had not formerly possessed, but which
had already been the property of others; but its value
will doubtless be greatly increased if we can show that
it frequently enables enquirers to arrive at truths which
no human being had before known that is presented
to himself in thought.
I think that I shall be able to show that this is the
case; but in order that I may do so, I must beg the
reader to consider the general notion of Deduction
rather than that special form with which "we are most
familiar.
All thought, we have seen, is the passage from idea
to idea. Now this passage may be either immediate,
when the two things or phaenomena represented by the
ideas have been directly connected in experience, or
mediate, when each of them is connected in thought
(and prior experience) with some third idea which forms
the link between them. The connection of each of
them with this third idea may again be either mediate
or immediate, and the number of steps which must
o 2


196
A Discourse on Tnith.
needs be taken in passing from the first to the last may-
be increased to any extent. I may know, for instance,
that all the artificial class A have the attribute B, that
all things which have B have C, that all things which
have C have D, and that all things which have D have
E. Now here it is obvious when I put together all these
propositions that the result follows, that all things which
are included in A have the attribute E, but was it in the
least necessary that I should have known this when
I propounded each of the separate propositions? I
answer, certainly not. When I stated my first propo-
sition I no doubt thought of the natural kinds which
were contained in A (a, /3, y, etc.). Now if I represent
humanity at large, my a, /3, y will represent truly the
whole artificial class A so that I really do think that
each one of these separately has B, but when, at some
other time, I state that all things which have B have
also C, I really think of the connection of the attributes
rather than of the individuals or classes to which these
attributes apply. A large number of other classes
besides A may have the attribute B, and my expe-
rience (being ex hypothesi universal) will cover them all.
In enunciating my general proposition I may think
of the artificial classes which have the attribute B (or,
more strictly speaking, of their names, since of an
artificial class there is usually no true idea), but it
would be impossible to break up all of these artificial


Dedtiction with several Terms. 197
classes into the natural kinds which are contained under
them, and there is no reason why I should break up the
class A more than any other of the many such classes
which possess B. The formulation of the truth, 'All
things which possess B possess also C,' is a mere state-
ment of a universal observation of the connection of
attributes, which does not imply or even suggest any
further observation of the things which possess those
attributes. When, again, I enunciate the proposition
all things which have C have D, I merely assert
(representing again the human race) my universal
experience of the conjunction of these two attributes.
I may or may not have noticed at the time that amongst
the things which had C were all the things which had
B, but this notice will not be immediately or necessa-
rily suggested by the proposition before me; still less
will any knowledge as to what might be the artificial
classes which possessed B.
For every step which has to be traversed A vanishes
more absolutely from view, and, when the intermediate
steps are many, it may well be that mankind shall for
years, nay centuries, have been possessed of the separate
propositions which constitute them, yet have never dis-
covered the possibility of so placing them together as
to show or discover the connection between the first
term and the last. Whoever, then, makes the discovery
that A is E, by following the process I have described,


198 A Discourse on Truth.
adds, I affirm, an item to the knowledge of the human
race. When the connection is once demonstrated, by
means of the use of the names which are thus put into
juxtaposition, man is enabled to pass at once from the
former idea to the latter without repeating on each occa-
sion the process by which the connection was arrived
at. He has got a piece of knowledge in practical work-
ing order which he may use immediately when the occa-
sion presents itself. He is more perfectly adjusted to
his circumstances than he was before the discovery.
Nay, but at any moment before, man might, had he
so chosen, have made this discovery. At any moment I
may cut my throat with my pocket-knife, but I have not
yet done so, nor has mankind yet got the knowledge
that A is E till some one has put together the detached
propositions and demonstrated the fact. To say that
mankind already knows a fact simply because the ma-
terial is at hand from which that knowledge may be pro-
cured with proper skill and diligence, is to assert that
a member of a firm, whose books have not been posted
for years, is aware of the state of the concern simply
because all the required knowledge may be abstracted
from the books; the task of abstracting such knowledge
may obviously require an amount of skill and persever-
ance with which but few individuals are endowed.
The result of our enquiry is this: Syllogism or Deduc-
tion with three terms is frequently useful for the increas-


Deduction with several Terms. 199
ing the knowledge of the individual, but rarely, if ever,
serves to add to the stock of the Human Race. Deduc-
tion, however, in the wider sense of the placing of a
number of intermediate terms as stages, by means of
which the mind may pass from one idea to another
otherwise unconnected with it, hath often and will often
establish connections between ideas which no mind has
hitherto noticed; by means of the conjunction of the
names hath rendered those connections practically
direct; and hath thus given new thought or new Know-
ledge to man. It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to point
out that as every one of these complex deductions, de-
pends upon a number of separate observations or induc-
tions, and as no one of the inductions can, according
to our system, rise to the ideal level of absolute cer-
tainty, it follows by the laws of probability (which may
be assumed as roughly, if not accurately correct) that
our expectation of the connection between two things
which is deduced from a number of observed connec-
tions should be much weaker than our confidence in any
one of these observed connections; so that if the num-
ber of steps be large, the expectation should be propor-
tionally small; and on this ground we may support the
law, which has long ago been laid down by philoso-
phers, that a complex deduction should be always, if it
may be, supported by a direct observation. Absolute
truth lies further from Deductive Science than even from


2CO
A Discourse on Truth.
Inductive. The so-called Deductive Sciences, which
seem most nearly to approximate to such truth rest, as
has been pointed out by Mr. Mill and others, on very
wide and very simple Inductions. Hence the stronger
expectation they arouse. Every Deduction requires two
or more prior Inductions, but the Deduction is not a
mere process of repeating the statement arrived at by
the Induction, nor does its result at all necessarily
resemble any of the inductive truths on which it is
founded. It is an original and distinct process of arriv-
ing at knowledge.
Against this view arise in arms, the great majority of
modern logicians, headed by their champion, Mr. Mill,
in his chapter on the Functions and Value of the Syllo-
gism (Logic, Part n., chap, iii.), though as Dr. Mansel
long ago pointed out his criticism contained in that
chapter seems inconsistent with what he afterwards
says of the importance of the Inductive Methods.*
Limiting his view of Deduction to that small and least
important portion of it, which is represented' by the
Syllogism, he affirms that it is absolutely incapable of
arriving at new truth (presumably even for the indivi-
dual, for nothing is said as to the distinction between
truth for the individual and that for mankind at large).
He would limit the function of the syllogism to that of
* Cf. Appendix on the Syllogism in Mansel's edition of Aldrich's 'Artis
Logicse Rudimenta.'


Mr. Mill's Criticism.
201
a registering machine for the convenient storing of
knowledge already possessed and the production of it
when required for a special case. The whole chapter
should be carefully read by whosoever wishes to under-
stand the rights of the controversy, since the doc-
trine, which I believe to be erroneous, is there stated in
the clearest and most forcible form. I will content
myself in this place with quoting and commenting on
those passages which seem most immediately to bear
on the question.
The most explicit passages in the chapter are con-
tained in sections 2 and 3, and in the note at the
end of the former section. There is always a danger
in abridgments or fragmentary quotations of an argu-
ment. It may ever be thought or said, that the view
thus presented is not a fair account of the position of
the author criticized; I prefer, therefore, even at the
risk of wearying my reader, to quote the passages in
full before proceeding to discuss the theory contained in
them. Section 2 runs thus:—
'It must be granted that in every syllogism con-
sidered as an argument to prove the conclusion, there is
a petitio firincipii' [i.e., an assumption of that which it
behoves us to prove]. 'When we say—
All men are mortal,
Socrates is a man,
therefore
Socrates is mortal.


202
A Discourse on Truth.
it is unanswerably urged by the adversaries of the
syllogistic theory, that the proposition, Socrates is
mortal, is presupposed in the more general assumption,
All men are mortal; that we cannot be assured of the
mortality of all men, unless we are already certain of
the mortality of every individual man; that if it be still
doubtful whether Socrates, or any other individual
whom you choose to name, be mortal or not, the same
degree of uncertainty must hang over the assertion, All
men are mortal; that the general principle, instead of
being given as evidence of the particular case, cannot
itself be taken for true without exception, until every
shadow of doubt which could affect any case comprised
within it is dispelled by evidence aliunde; and then
what remains for the syllogism to prove? That, in
short, no reasoning from generals to particulars can, as
such, prove anything; since from a general principle we
cannot infer any particulars other than those which the
principle itself assumes as known.
'This doctrine appears to be irrefragable; and if
logicians, though unable to dispute it, have usually ex-
hibited a strong disposition to explain it away, this was
not because they could discover any flaw in the argument
itself, but because the contrary opinion seemed to rest
upon arguments equally indisputable. In the syllogism
last referred to, for example, is it not evident that the
conclusion may, to the person to whom the syllogism


Quotation from Mr. Mill.
203
is presented, be actually and bond fide a new truth? Is
it not a matter of daily experience that truths previously
unthought of—facts which have not been, and cannot
be directly observed, are arrived at by way of general
reasoning? We believe that the Duke of Wellington is
mortal. We do not know this by direct observation as
long as he is not yet dead. It we were asked how,
this being the case, we know the Duke to be mortal, we
should probably answer, Because all men are so. Here,
therefore, we arrive at the knowledge of a truth not (as
yet) susceptible of observation, by a reasoning which
admits of being exhibited in the following syllogism:—
All men are mortal,
The Duke of Wellington is a man,
therefore
The Duke of Wellington is mortal.
'And since a large portion of our knowledge is thus
acquired, logicians have persisted in representing the
syllogism as a process of inference or proof; though
none of them has cleared up the difficulty which arises
from the inconsistency between that assertion and the
principle that if there be anything in the conclusion
which was not already asserted in the premises, the
argument is vicious. For it is impossible to attach any
serious scientific value to such a mere salvo as the dis-
tinction drawn between being involved by implication
in the premises, and being directly asserted in them.
When Archbishop Whately says that the object of


204
A Discourse on Truth.
reasoning is "merely to expand and unfold the asser-
tions wrapt up, as it were, and implied in those with
which we set out, and to bring a person to perceive and
acknowledge the full force of that which he has ad-
mitted," he does not, I think, meet the real difficulty re-
quiring to be explained, namely, how it happens that
a science like geometry can be all "wrapt up" in a
few definitions and axioms. Nor does the defence of
the syllogism differ much from what its assailants urge
against it as an accusation, when they charge it with
being of no use except to those who seek to press
the consequences of an admission into which a person
has been entrapped without having considered and
understood its full force. When you admitted the
major premiss you asserted the conclusion. But, says
Archbishop Whately, you asserted it by implication
merely; this, however, can have only meant that you
asserted it unconsciously; that you did not know you
were asserting it; but if so, the difficulty revives in
this shape—Ought you not to have known? Were you
warranted in asserting the general proposition without
having satisfied yourself of the truth of everything
which it fairly includes? And if not, is not the syllo-
gistic act prima facie what its assailants affirm it to be,
a contrivance for catching you in a trap, and holding
you fast in it ?' *
* 'It is hardly necessary to say that I am not contending for any such


Quotation from Mr. Mill.
205
'Section 3. From this difficulty there appears to be
but one issue. The proposition that the Duke of Wel-
lington is mortal is evidently an inference; it is got at
as a conclusion from something else; but do we, in
reality, conclude it from the proposition, All men are
mortal? I answer, no.'
1 The error committed is, I conceive, that of overlook-
ing the distinction between two parts of the process of
philosophising, the inferring part, and the registering
part; and ascribing to the latter the functions of the
former. The mistake is that of referring a person to
his own notes for the origin of his knowledge. If a
person is asked a question, and is at the moment un-
able to answer it, he may refresh his memory by turning
to a memorandum which he carries about with him.
But if he were asked how the fact came to his know-
ledge, he would scarcely answer because it was set
down in his note-book, unless the book was written, like
absurdity as that we actually "ought to have known " and considered the case
of every individual man, past, present, and future, before affirming that all
men are mortal; although this interpretation has been, strangely enough, put
upon the preceding observations. There' is no difference between me and
Archbishop Whately, or any other defender of the syllogism, on the practical
part of the matter; I am only pointing out an inconsistency in the logical
theory of it, as conceived by almost all writers. I do not say that a person
who affirmed, before the Duke of Wellington was born, that all men are mortal,
knew that the Duke of Wellington was mortal, but I do say that he asserted it,
and I ask for an explanation of the apparent logical fallacy of adducing in
proof of the Duke of Wellington's mortality a general' statement which pre-
supposes it. Finding no sufficient resolution of this difficulty in any of the
writers on Logic, I have attempted to supply one.'


206
A Discourse on Truth.
the Koran, with a quill from the wing of the angel
Gabriel/
'Assuming that the proposition, The Duke of Wel-
lington is mortal, is immediately an inference from the
proposition, All men are mortal; whence do we derive
our knowledge of that general truth? Of course from
observation. Now all which man can observe are indi-
vidual cases. From all these general truths must be
drawn, and into these they may be again resolved, for
a general truth is but an aggregate of particular truths;
a comprehensive expression by which a number of par-
ticular facts are affirmed or denied at once. But a
general proposition is not merely a compendious form
for recording and preserving in the memory a number
of particular facts, all of which have been observed.
Generalization is not a process of mere naming, it is
also a process of inference. From instances which we
have observed we feel warranted in concluding, that
what we found true in these instances holds in all
similar ones, past, present, and future, however nume-
rous they may be. We then, by that valuable contri-
vance of language which enables us to speak of many
as if they were one, record all that we have observed,
together with all that we infer from our observations, in
one concise expression; and have thus only one proposi-
tion, instead of an endless number, to remember or to
communicate. The result of many observations and


Examination of Mr. Mill's argument. 207
inferences, and instructions for making innumerable
inferences in unforeseen cases, are compressed into one
short sentence. When, therefore, we conclude from the
death of John and Thomas, and every other person we
have heard of in whose case the experiment has been
fairly tried, that the Duke of Wellington is mortal like
the rest; we may indeed pass through the generalization,
All men are mortal, as an intermediate stage; but it
is not in the latter half of the process, the descent from
all men to the Duke of Wellington, that the inference
resides. The inference is finished when we have as-
serted that All men are mortal. What remains to be
performed afterwards is merely the deciphering of our
own notes.'
The whole gist of the controversy seems to me to lie in
this question, Do we assert, when we say that 'All men
are mortal,' that the unborn babe is mortal? If we do,
then syllogism at least must resign all its pretensions
to be considered as a method of inference, although
even then Deduction in the wider sense, as comprehend-
ing more than these terms, may have claims to be con-
sidered which Mr. Mill has altogether ignored. It seems
to me that since every assertion has no value except
as representing thought, and as of unborn babies at
large I nor any one else can have any thought what-
soever, no individual's assertion can at this moment
apply to them. If my assertion, 'All men are mortal,'


208
be not true unless it apply at this moment to all pos-
sible future unborn babies, then since according to
what we have before said no assertion as to possible
future beings is at this moment either false or true,
no universal proposition can logically be affirmed to
be true.
The fact is, that Mr. Mill's analysis of the Uni-
versal proposition, as given in this passage, is not only
self-contradictory, but is absolutely at variance with
that which he himself gives when dealing with the
Import of propositions. There, in analysing the very
same universal proposition which we have before us
in this passage, he reduces it at last to this form, as
the best representative of the true thought expressed
by it, Mortality constantly accompanies the attributes
of Man. In the very chapter which precedes that from
which we have taken our quotation, he declares that the
general form of a universal proposition is, 'Attribute
A is a mark of attribute B.' Now it seems to me
that I may clearly make this latter assertion without
thinking at all of the individuals which possess A and
B respectively, and if this be the real form of a uni-
versal proposition, mankind at large will necessarily
understand it in the sense in which I use it, that is, as
not referring to a number, large or small, of individuals,
but to the invariable co-existence of two attributes.
Now my assertion can express nothing except what I


Examination of Mr. Mill's Theory. 209
mean by it, or what the majority of mankind will natu-
rally understand me to mean by it. Yet according to •
Mr. Mill's own showing, neither do I in speaking think
of a large number of individuals, nor do my hearers for
a moment imagine that I intend to do so. How I can
be said to have made any assertion about a thing which
was neither in my mind at the moment of speaking,
nor could possibly have been suggested to the mind of
any who listened to me, I confess myself unable to
conceive.
But we have not nearly got to the end of our diffi-
culties. Mr. Mill admits that many truths previously
unthought of are arrived at by general reasoning.
We ask how this is, and how, if it be so, it can at the
same time be true that general reasoning is capable of
no inference, that is, at arriving at no truth? The
answer is, that this general reasoning is not general
reasoning. It is particular reasoning slightly dis-
guised; I really think that the Duke of Wellington will
die, not because all men will die, but because John,
James, etc., have died. I ask, what logical connection
have John and James with the Duke of Wellington?
John's death is a separate fact, so is that of James,
neither of them have any logical connection with any
other fact, nor with each other. Even when the mind
puts them together, it has no logical warrant in passing
from them to anything else. Before John and James
p


2IO
A Discourse on Truth.
are any use to me for an inference, I must transmute
them by means of somewhat which is not in them, but
which I add to them. This addition is that of which
we have already treated when talking of universal
propositions, and again in the chapter on Causation.
It is a tacit assertion of the intention of expecting like
results in similar cases. This assertion is precisely the
universal portion of the proposition, and I affirm that
without it any inference is impossible. We cannot
argue from particular to particular without first in our
own minds constituting the particular for the moment a
universal—without making a mental addition to it.
Psychologically this mental addition may be explained
in a fashion which will show that it is rather passive
than active. It is closely connected with that which
is ordinarily considered one of the most lamentable
weaknesses of frail humanity—to wit, the deficiency of
memory. When we have seen a great number of men
and known that they all have died, the idea of death
will be connected, not with each separate individual
and his peculiarities, but with that which remains after
those traits which are peculiar to each individual have
vanished from our minds by lapse of time, that is, with
the general idea of man. The connection Man—Mortal
remains, and since the idea Man has now been stripped
of all individual peculiarities, I shall doubtless find it
applicable to the next individual of the species I come


All Inference really involves a Universal. 211
across, and by applying it to him shall, through the
connection of the general idea Man with the idea
Mortal, be able to assert that the individual now pre-
sented to me for the first time is mortal.
Not only is it true that all inference must be made by
means of a real universal proposition, but it is further the
fact, that the inference is not made till the new indi-
vidual presents himself to sensation or thought. The
universal is a blank form; an affirmation of intention. It
is not the cheque until it is filled up, which can only be
done when the individual with his peculiarities, which
render him a definite being in sensation or imagina-
tion, is before the one or the other. The filling up of
the cheque, not the procuring of the form, is the true
inference.
I have a definitely new piece of knowledge when
I pass for the first time from the idea of the Duke
of Wellington to the idea mortal (that this knowledge
is in this case very trivial and unimportant, we shall
see in the sequel, and the causes of its triviality, but
what we shall have to say on that head will in no way
affect the main argument). Every time that I acquire
a new piece of knowledge there must either be an act of
direct consciousness or an inference. In this case the
only new piece of direct information is the real or
fancied present existence of the Duke of Wellington; the
further notion of his mortality must be therefore due


212
A Discourse on Truth.
te an inference, and as the idea of the Duke of Wel-
lington was by hypothesis not present to me before this
moment, I could not until [this moment have got the
connection of ideas, Duke of Wellington—mortal, which
constitutes my new piece of knowledge. It was there-
fore at this moment and no other that the inference was
made.
The particular facts which have constituted our pre-
vious experience are indeed the material out of which
the mind, by a peculiar act, forms the universal pro-
position from which again, after the addition of the
particular instance, the conclusion is inferred, but the
collection of the material or evidence is not the judg-
ment. Affidavits of witnesses may be collected for years
or months beforehand, but the criminal is only then con-
demned when the judge has pronounced sentence on
him in his presence. In our case the criminal—the par-
ticular instance—has not yet been caught when the uni-
versal proposition is formulated, though the judge—the
Reason—has announced his intention of sentencing him
whensoever he is brought before him. Mr. Mill seems
to confound the formulation of intention of performing
an act when occasion occurs with the act itself; the
assertion that if any one insults me I will knock him
down, with the actual execution of the threat upon
some offender. So much for the main issue.
Some of the corroboratory arguments by which Mr.


The Argument of the Note-book. 213
Mill supports his theory seem especially open to criti-
cism. Thus, for instance, he attempts to establish a
contradiction between the doctrine that the syllogism is
or may be a real inference, and the logical dictum that
there should be nothing in the conclusion except what
is contained in the premises. But surely his argument
is lame on both legs. There is nought in water besides
hydrogen and oxygen. Yet water is not merely hy-
drogen and oxygen. There is the further fact of their
mixture. So too there may be no matter in the con-
clusion but what is contained in the premises, but there
is the further fact of the conjunction of those premises
which may, and often does, constitute the conclusion,
a thought different from either of the premises taken
separately, or from the sum of both considered as
standing apart from each other.
The argument as to the note-book would only hold
good if the fact of the Duke of Wellington being mortal
had been conceived before. If it has not, then, how-
ever the note-book may help us towards arriving at
that thought, it at least does not contain it. For all
more complicated cases of Deduction, I hold that my
former illustration of the ledger which has not yet been
added up, far more accurately Represents the facts of
the case than Mr. Mill's note-book.
The language of the note on section two, seems to
me even more unguarded than that of the text. In what


214
A Discourse on Truth.
conceivable sense of the word ' suppose' can the state-
ment, All men are mortal be said to ' pre-suppose' the
mortality of a number of possible creatures whose ex-
istence is not supposed by either speaker or hearers;
about whom in fact nothing is or can be supposed.
As to the controversy with Archbishop Whately—
that writer has undoubtedly stated his case in a
form which laid him open to verbal criticism, but if we
shall transform his statement into this, which is ob-
viously its equivalent, 'the object of reasoning is
merely to expand or make definite, by means of indi-
vidual instances, assertions which as originally stated
were merely vague and potential,' there will then be
no question of unfairness or catching men in traps.
The original speaker or the pupil has stated or agreed
to a proposition in some such form as this, 'wherever I
find certain signs, I shall be justified in assuming the
presence of certain attributes.' When he made that
assertion, he probably knew full well that he had not
investigated all the instances which he or other men
might come across, he only wished to declare that from his
own experience, and what he had heard or knew of the
experience of other men, he should expect the attributes
to follow wherever the sign presented itself. His inter-
locutor or teacher then shows him a case which has not
before arisen in his experience, in which the sign is
present. According to his original statement, he must


Trivial and Valuable Deductions. 215
naturally admit that he will now expect the presence of
the attributes whereof he has asserted his intention of
taking this sign as a ground of expectation in all cases.
His original assertion may have been made on weak
evidence or on strong (remembering always that there
is no absolute strength or certainty), but, since he
never imagined that the evidence covered all cases, and
was therefore fully prepared to expect a like result
in an instance not hitherto noticed; there can be no
question of taking him off his guard or catching him
in a trap.
I said above that the piece of knowledge conveyed by
the inference from All men are mortal, to, The Duke of
Wellington is a mortal, was a very trivial and unim-
portant one, and the reason of this statement will be
evident to all who consider the distinction which we
drew at the beginning of the chapter between syllogisms
applied to natural real kinds and natural causes, and
those which have to do with artificial classes; we saw
there by instances that the former were useless for the
increase of knowledge and the latter all-important.
The explanation of this statement I have deferred till
the present moment, because it seemed to come more
conveniently and naturally after the criticism of a
passage which in truth derives a great deal of its
plausibility from the fact that the instance which is
therein selected for discussion is one of those very


2l6
A Discourse on Truth.
syllogisms as to Natural Kinds which we ourselves
reject as valueless.
What, according to our former analysis, is a legitimate
syllogism? It is the passage of the mind from one idea
to another by means of a third, with which both are
connected, from A to C through B. In order that the
syllogism may be a legitimate mediate inference, each
of these ideas must be perfectly distinct although con-
nected. Now in cases of syllogisms in which the minor
premise or instance asserts that an individual belongs to
a Natural Kind, there are really not three ideas but two.
The idea of man is not a separate idea from that of the
Duke of Wellington, but a necessary part of that idea.
In order that the syllogism shall be of any value as an
instrument for conveying or arriving at knowledge, it is
necessary that it should be possible that the first and
third ideas should be present together in the mind, and
that yet the second or connecting link should for the
moment be absent, so that the connection between them
should be unnoticed.
For instance, it is possible that I might know as
a fact that All Whales were Mammals, and, again,
that All Mammals had lungs; but when thinking of
the question whether or no whales had lungs, it is
not at all necessary that these two propositions, both
of which I was theoretically aware of, should be at
the moment present to my mind. Neither of the


Trivial and Valuable Deductions. 217
two extreme ideas necessarily . suggest the middle
term, since, according to the doctrine I laid down in
the second chapter, the class Mammal is an artificial
one in reference to Whale, and therefore the idea of the
whale does not necessarily contain the quality of giving
suck to its young. If, however, I try to think of the
two ideas Duke of Wellington and 'Mortal,' I must
necessarily, at the same moment, think of the idea
'Man,' which is the connecting link between them,
since that idea is involved in the idea Duke of Welling-
ton, and cannot in any way be separated from it. The
idea Duke of Wellington is the idea Man, with certain
additions of individual peculiarities. I hold that when
I say All men are mortal, The Duke of Wellington is
a man, therefore the Duke of Wellington is mortal, I
do indeed perform an inference, if I have never before
thought of the Duke of Wellington in conjunction with
the idea of mortality, but it is an inference which I
cannot fail to make the moment I conceive the two
extreme ideas together in consciousness. The con-
necting link between them is at once apparent, since
it is a mere portion of one of them.
Now the whole art of Deductive or Syllogistic in-
struction or discovery consists in hitting upon some
connecting link between ideas, from the one to the
other of which the mind cannot directly pass. I know
or may know a great many truths about whales besides


21S A Discourse on Truth.
the fact that they may be placed in the artificial class of
Mammalia, I know a good many things about creatures
which have lungs besides the fact that All Mammals are
amongst them, but none of the other truths which I
know about whales or lungs will enable me to connect
the idea of the former with the notion of the possession
of the latter. If I find then a connecting link between
two ideas such as those which we have just discussed, it
is extremely probable that my fellow men may not yet
have made this discovery, and it is therefore worth
while to convey it to them in the form in which I
discovered it: Whale—Mammal—Creature with lungs.
In the former case the connecting link is at once obvious
to any one who brings together the two extreme ideas
Duke of Wellington and Mortal, and I can do no good
by stating it. I assume, of course, in both cases that
the propositions on which the syllogisms rest are known
to all mankind.
The most serious and weighty objection that has ever
been raised against the syllogism seems to me to be
that of Locke, as urged in his chapter on Reason (the
17th of the 4th Book of the Essay on the Human
Understanding), where he asserts that syllogism does
not represent but perverts the natural order of thought.
That no man naturally reasons in this order Man-
Animal; Negro Man; Negro Animal, but in the sim-
pler and more rational order Negro Man Animal; or if


Locke's Criticism.
219
it be written out in full, Negro Man Man Animal, there-
fore Negro Animal.
This objection I hold to be entirely valid, but it
tells nothing against the Deductive Method, which
consists merely in placing the intermediate idea Man
between Negro and Animal, in order to facilitate or
render possible the passage of thought from one of
these two extreme ideas to the other. It at most
points out that the ordinarily accepted form of syllo-
gism does not duly represent the deductive process.
And this is indubitably true. The term or idea which
forms the connecting link between two other terms or
ideas, must come midway in thought, and should there-
fore be placed in the middle in the form which aims at
representing the process of thought. The modern syl-
logism in its most common form, represents us when
attempting to pass from C to A through B, which
is known to be connected with each, as first begin-
ning with B and going on to A, then starting back
to C and proceeding to B (all B is A; all C is B,
therefore all C is A).' This surely is a very round-
about way of journeying from C to A; we should
naturally either begin with A, pass through B, and
arrive at C, or conversely start with C, and through B
pass to A.
It is observable, however, that Locke's objection
only applies to the modern form of syllogism, and


220
A Discotirse 011 Truth.
not to that propounded by Aristotle, who at least
introduced into Europe, if he did not discover,* the use
of the syllogistic form. With him the ' Perfect Syllo-
gism' is that wherein the connecting link in thought
is also the middle term in speech. The syllogism will
have two forms according as we proceed from A, the
widest term, to C, the narrowest, or from C inversely^to
A. We may either say A belongs to all B, B to all
C, therefore A to all C (mortality to all animals, the
• being animals to all men, therefore the being mortal to
all men), or conversely All C is B, all B is A, therefore
all C is A (all men are animals; all animals are
mortal, therefore all men are mortal). But whichever
form we may adopt, the connecting link B still comes
midmost in speech as it does in thought. The syllo-
gism is a true representative of our mental process, and
escapes the criticism of Locke.
We have seen then that both Syllogism when pro-
perly treated, and still more Deduction at large, are
methods by which the knowledge both of individuals
* The question as to the probability of Aristotle having borrowed his scheme
of the syllogism from the Nyaya of Gotama, through his nephew Callisthenes,
who accompanied Alexander to India, and had certainly opportunities of com-
munication with the learned Brahmins, is a very interesting one, and still
awaits certain solution. I must confess that the arguments of St. Hilaire, who
strenuously supports the originality of Aristotle, do not altogether convince
me. (Cf. Barthe'lemy St.7 Hilaire, 'Le Nyaya,' Part III. p. 237, in 'Memoires
de l'Academie,' tome III. 2"" Serie; Sir W. Jones' Works, vol. I. p. 164;
Colebrooke, Essays, VII. Part II.)


True Form of Syllogism.
221
and of mankind in general may in truth be increased.
Further, that the essence of all Deductive Reasoning is
the insertion of one or more ideas as intermediate steps
between two extreme ideas whose connection is not
immediately obvious. Whether the intermediate steps
be one or many, matters not one whit as far as the
nature of the process is concerned. By far the most
numerous and important instances of the Deductive
Method contain, however, a very large number of inter-
mediate terms. The attempt to reduce such reasonings
into the form of a chain of syllogisms would be about
as rational as the transformation of all calculations
into a scale of notation whereof the highest digit
was 3.


CHAPTER VII.
ON THE MATTER OF THOUGHT.
What is present in the mind when we think? Ideas.
Granted; but the answer does not lead us far, since in
this sense an Idea is merely any representative state of
consciousness, as opposed to Sensations, Emotions, and
Activities, which are the direct or primitive states which
those ideas represent. Any of the immediate states of
consciousness may give rise to or be the first step of a
train of thought, but it is obvious that any further steps
must be taken by means of ideas. Thought is usually
at highest when sensation, emotion, and activity (other
than that of thought itself) are at lowest. It is obvious
then that these three cannot immediately and at the
moment supply the fuel which supports the flame of
thought. It remains that this fuel should be furnished
by the only other material which can be present to
the mind—to wit—the ideas or representations of past
sensations, emotions, or activities which are stored up
within it.
The true question before us is, Does the mind in


Does the Mind use all Ideas indifferently? 223
thinking use all kinds of ideas indifferently, or is there
any one class of ideas to which it accords a preference
partial or exclusive? In all that we have said in the
preceding chapters we have assumed no such exclusive
preference, but have spoken as if any idea whatsoever
might be and ordinarily was used by the mind, as first,
second, third, and so on to last term of any process of
reasoning or argument. In so doing we have followed
the invariable custom of all writers on the subject; but
if we shall discover that the human mind, that at least
of man as we now know him, employs almost exclusively
one class of ideas in thought, we shall have to this
extent to modify our former statements. All that we
have said will still be true as to the way in which man-
kind might reason, and still perhaps occasionally does
reason; but in order duly to represent the ordinary
process of thought we shall have to substitute for the
word idea, some narrower name which belongs to the
class of ideas habitually employed in thought, and to
those only.
Ideas we have said are representations of emotions,
activities, and sensations. Now in composing or think-
ing out the last few pages, what class of ideas have I
used? I have obviously had present to my mind no re-
presentations of emotions or activities, since the subject
is neither tragic nor comic, neither historical nor horta-
tive. I have, as far as I can analyse my own conscious-


224
A Discourse on Truth.
ness, had present to that consciousness no representa-
tions of visible objects,* no notions of smell or touch,
still less any of taste. There remain only one order of
ideas—those which represent sensations of sound. Of
these, I have thought neither of notes of music, nor of
beasts bellowing, nor of any irrational or non-human
sound whatsoever. Words only have been represented
in my consciousness, and my thought has flowed on from
one of them to the other without stopping, except per-
haps at rare intervals, at the beginning or end of an
argument, to consider at all what are the ideas or mental
images of direct states of consciousness (other than the
sounds of human speech) which the words of which I
have been thinking represent. When my thought has
been most intense, I have at times been conscious of the
fact that I was half-forming my mouth to the articula-
tion of those sounds whose representations were passing
along in review in my mind. Is my thought to be con-
demned as valueless by reason of this my confusion?
Must it be said that the whole argument is 'Mere
Words.' I am confident that if I am cast on this charge,
all the ordinary reasoning of any civilized man will
fall under a like condemnation. Let any man ask him-
self honestly how many times in an hour's serious
thought he forms or uses the representation or mental
image of aught else than sounds of spoken speech,
* This I must perhaps qualify by what comes hereafter (p. 232, etc.).


Thought a String of Words.
225
I am ready to wager that he will have no diffi-
culty in counting those times on the fingers of one
hand.
The fact is that except when our consciousness is so
taken up with direct sensations that thought is almost
excluded; or when, on the other hand we are sunk in
one of those delicious reveries when thought is at slowest,
and when we pass lazily and luxuriously from one lovely
image to another, the whole of our waking conscious-
ness is an almost unbroken passage of long strings of
words through the mind. Not only is this the case, but
it becomes ever more and more so as mankind advances
in the scale of civilization. I shall first attempt to prove
this apparent paradox, and to show that this substitu-
tion of ideas of words for other mental images as the
material of thought is part of the great process of the
advance of civilization and the fitting of man for his
circumstances. I shall then answer the objections which
seem to rise against the doctrine, both from the side of
philosophy and that of plain common sense. I shall
show that some very curious and interesting conse-
quences can be drawn from it which explain facts that
have already been observed, but seem as yet to lack
elucidation, and I shall finish the subject with a Utopian
extension of the progress historically observed, which
the reader may if he pleases reject as absurd as a pro-
phecy, but which will, as I hope, at least serve to render
Q


226
A Discourse on Triith.
more clearly understandable what I assert as to the past
advance of the Human Race.
The savage lives much with nature and little with his
fellow-men. He hunts or tends his flocks alone, or with
but few companions, and with them exchanges in the
day but few words. If he returns to his village in the
evening he sits almost silent by the camp-fire, or takes
part in monotonous songs unvaried from night to night,
and full of refrains and repetitions. His language is
limited perhaps to a hundred words, and those words
are themselves for the most part not arbitrary and
distinct signs whereof several must be conjoined to
describe even the most simple experience, but complex
word-sentences un-distinct into parts, each one of which,
aided most commonly by gestures, is intended to imitate
an experience. The sound is either a repetition of some
natural noise actually heard, or it is such a sound as
might usually be emitted by a person or thing per-
forming the activity which he desires to describe (com-
pare the child's puff-puff for train, gee-gee for horse).
It has neither verb nor noun, neither grammar nor
arrangement. It is simply a representation (as nearly
as may be an imitation) of some sensation, emotion, or
activity, or of some sound which usually accompanies
such.
Meanwhile at all times when his consciousness is
not taken up by direct sensation or emotion, the savage


Picture-thought of the Savage. 227
thinks; for no mind in its waking moments is ever
absolutely unoccupied. Of what do his thoughts
consist? Not of words, for of those he has but few,
and they themselves are merely imperfect images of his
experience; but of direct reproductions of that expe-
rience itself. He thinks of last year's hunt or yester-
day's meal. Each detail of the picture is slowly revived
in memory, and from this picture he gradually passes to
some other suggested by it, which again has to be
completed in its details, more or less distinctly, before
he is ready to pass from it to another. Slow is the
thought of the savage, for the occasions when he has to
reason are few, and his surroundings are simple, and
change but little from year to year. He but rarely
arrives by reasoning at a new truth, but he has few
occasions for seeking for one. Meanwhile his imagi-
nation will be at its vividest. His power of conjuring
up a scene in all its details will be much greater than
that of more civilized man. It may well be that the
deficiency of language of which we have already spoken,
will prevent him from communicating to civilized
observers the full vividness of the picture which he
raises up before his own eyes; but when he attempts to
describe any strange phaenomenon, his language, if he
have arrived at a sufficient stage of cultivation to have
distinct language, will be full of those word-images
which have so greatly and so often impressed observers
q a


228
A Discourse on Truth.
with the unconscious poetry of the savage. Every
name of a man or beast will be a picturesque description
—an attempt to arouse in the hearer the picture which
the speaker himself attempts to form the moment that
name is mentioned.
When he advances to the further stage of representing
to the eye the names which he has hitherto addressed
to the ear only, his representations will all take the
form of pictures. There will, as far as may be, be
nothing conventional or arbitrary either in his spoken or
his written language. Here then we get the thought of
which philosophers usually treat, which consists of a
succession of ideas or images of actual observed phae-
nomena, suggesting each other in the order of obser-
vation. The primitive savage alone possesses in its
purity the form of thought usually described as though
it were universal.
As mankind advances to the higher stages of civili-
zation a double change goes on. It becomes more and
more impossible, as the experience of the individual
becomes ever wider, at all to represent that experience
to his fellow-men by imitative sounds and gestures.
The imitative sound which expressed horse (whether it
reproduced the neigh, the sound of the hoofs, or the
noise of the driver) will not enable the hearer to ascer-
tain whether mare, pony, or colt is meant to be repre-
sented. Affixes and suffixes have to be added to the


Imitative Language.
229
original sounds, in order to represent these distinctions,
which, as life advances in complexity, become ever
more important. These additions may themselves have
been originally imitative, as for instance, if the imita-
tive word for elephant be used as an affix to the name
of any other animal to represent greatness; thus the
imitative sounds representing elephant-horse will be
put together to represent a breed of big English horses,
as distinguished from the ponies before known in the
country; * but in the compound word thus formed, the
affix representing elephant is purely conventional. It is
not intended to raise the image of the elephant (whose
trumpeting or what-not it imitates), but to qualify the
notion raised by the imitative word for horse, so as to
raise in the mind of the hearer the notion of a distinct
though allied species. Gradually the separate natural
meanings of the parts of the common word become alto-
gether obliterated, and the word is reduced to a purely
conventional sign for a breed of animals. The wider
the experience of natural objects, the more entirely con-
ventional do their names become.
Nor is this all; the sentence was originally a mere
picture of some sensation or action; the person who
performed the action or experienced the sensation was
always indicated by gesture; so too present events were
* Compare the actual use in Hebrew of the word God to represent greatness.
Hill of God = Great Hill, and so forth.


230
A Discourse on Truth.
only distinguished from past by some natural signs such
as stretching out the hands to indicate events in the past
or future.* But when, in the increased complexity of
advancing civilization, it is necessary to indicate the
actions of distant persons to whom we cannot point,
to show whether they be one or more, and again whether
the events be past or future (which our pointing out-
wards does not show), still more when distinctions have
to be made between different lengths of past time; the
verb, the pronoun, and the other parts of speech neces-
sarily emerge, and we have the grammatical sentence
distinct into parts and altogether conventional. This is
one side of the change.
Simultaneously with this progress mankind lives ever
more and more with his fellow-men, and uttered or
written words form continually a larger and more
important portion of his direct experience. Consider
how small a portion there is in the daily experience of
any one of us which is aught else than words. The
trade of the politician, of the barrister, of the preacher,
consists in nothing but in arranging, uttering, and
listening to, words. Those of us who have leisure ex-
pend almost the whole of it either in society or in
reading. Continually we have new words and combi-
nations of words presented to us, but how rarely new
* Cf. Mr. Tylor's 'Primitive Culture,' chapters v. and vi., especially
pp. 163-4, second edition.


Words, the greatest part of Civilized Experience. 231
things! Even the artizan or labourer, whose work lies
mainly with his hands, after his apprenticeship has
passed away, gets little new experience except of
words. His work, repeated day after day, suggests no
new thoughts; and his whole mental food consists in
the conversation of the ale-house or the club, where he
hears or reads the newspaper, and discusses politics or
the state of the crops. Put aside those who travel or
make experiments, and we may safely say that for the
rest of mankind direct consciousness is aroused bywords
ten times for every once that it is excited by all the
other sensations and emotions put together.
It may be objected that written words are not the
same things, considered as elements of consciousness, as
spoken words; that the one are sensations of the eye,
and the other of the ear, and that therefore that which
we read should not be counted as increasing our ex-
perience of audible words, unless indeed we read aloud.
This I believe to be so far a tnle objection, that highly
civilized individuals do not when reading mentally trans-
late the written words into oral ones, but can if need
be, and do at intervals throughout their reading, pass
directly from the written word to the idea of the thing,
without the intervention of the idea of the sound of the
name. But this, as I shall show more at length in
the Utopian portion of this chapter, is merely a further
development of the process which I am here describing


232
A Discourse on Tnith.
of thinking by means of signs without the imagining of
the thing signified, since the written words are the
representatives, not directly of the thing, but of the
pronunciation of the name.
This, however, is a very high development, with which
we need not now concern ourselves; it may suffice us to
notice that the learner always, and a great portion of
readers throughout their lives, do as they read translate
in their minds each written word into its corresponding
audible sound. Let him who doubts it go into the tap-
room of the nearest inn, and listen to the muttering of
the respectable farmer as he cons over his Standard.
The next stage is that wherein the translation into
ideas of audible sounds, though still performed, is
entirely a mental process, unaided by the actual or
partial utterance of those sounds. This is the stage at
which the great majority of readers have, as I believe,
arrived. Above and below it there are other stages, in
the lower of which certain hard words are audibly pro-
nounced, and in the higher the commoner words are not
even conceived as sounds in the mind, but remain as
marks which the eye and the mind rapidly pass over
without translating into ideas of sound; using them to
qualify the less common words which are still so trans-
lated. To all who in any way translate into notions of
uttered words those written or printed words which they
have before their eyes, the operation of reading does


Picture- Thought becomes ever more Difficult. 233
increase that portion of consciousness which is given up
to articulate sounds and their representations.
Since, then, a continually increasing portion of man's
actual experience consists of words, that is, audible
articulate sounds, it follows, according to the law of
thought which is acknowledged by all philosophers,
that a continually increasing portion of his representa-
tive consciousness will consist of ideas of words. More-
over, as the words become more and more entirely
conventional, it will become more and more difficult to
translate each word or combination of words into the
thing signified by them; the image of a ferocious
warrior will be less directly aroused by the name
Tamerlane than by the appellation Crouching Tiger or
Orang-Outang, especially if the syllables composing
the names of these animals are real imitations of their
cries. The fact must be acknowledged that represen-
tative thought becomes slower and more difficult as
civilization advances. If, then, every word used in an
argument is or ought to be translated into the idea for
which it stands, before we can legitimately pass on to
the next, the civilized man with his conventional voca-
bulary will fall far behind the simpler savage in
rapidity of thought and reasoning. As it is obvious
that the exact reverse of this is the case, we must
again, and from an independent ground, conclude that
the greater part of these reasonings are conducted by


234
A Discozirse on Truth.
means of trains of words, along which the mind passes
without the least attempt at translating these words
into the ideas of things of which they are the represen-
tatives.
Now the questions which we have to answer are,
First, what is the character of that thought which is
conducted entirely, or almost entirely, by means of
ideas of words; Secondly, is the change from picture-
thought to verbal-thought an improvement or the re-
verse? Our answer to the first of these questions will
manifestly determine the reply which we have to give
to the second.
What is the nature of verbal thought, we shall best
understand, if we remember that the words at least of
a civilized language are mere arbitrary symbols of
things. All thought conducted directly by means of
words is symbolic. It has no meaning as affecting life till
it be re-translated into terms of the sensations, etc., for
which the words stand. But in a reasoning process it
is neither necessary nor possible that each step should
be thus translated; all that is necessary is that the
starting-point should represent a real experience, and
that at the close of the argument the conclusion should
be represented to the mind in terms of ideas which
are the real images of sensation; the intermediate
terms, however many they may be, need never be
thus translated.


Symbolic Thought.
235
Suppose I notice that a certain person has a mark
on his arm, and am anxious to discover whether he
is to be trusted. I may arrange a deduction in this
form. The person before me has a certain mark on the
arm, all persons with this mark have been branded by
the military authorities. All those who have been
branded by the military authorities have committed a
serious offence, No persons who have committed such
serious offences are to be trusted, therefore this person
is not to be trusted. Here the first proposition repre-
sents my experience at this moment, and the last pro-
position or conclusion must be translated as picturing
me to abstain from any act which I may have contem-
plated, implying trust in the person before me. But all
the intermediate propositions are in my thought mere
conjunctions of words, and so remain. If I really trans-
lated the second proposition into terms of the ideas for
which the words stand, I should have to think of a
number of persons whom I had seen or heard of with this
mark, and of the scene in the barracks or prison-yard
wherein each of them had had the mark inflicted;
since it is obvious that there have not been enough
cases to give me a true general idea of all persons who
have this mark. As a matter of fact I probably have
had no experience of such a scene, I may never even
have seen an account of any individual case; I have
simply taken the formula from others who I believe


236 A Discourse on Truth.
have had sufficient evidence on which to establish it, and
use it for the purpose of forming a connecting link in
my argument, without for a moment thinking of the
number of pictures which its terms, when translated
into sensational ideas, would give rise to. Did I at-
tempt to give sensational or emotional values to each
proposition involved in this argument, I could arrive at
no decision till after a very considerable space of time;
whereas I am conscious in this case, and in all similar
ones, that my thought passes through the different steps
with lightning-like rapidity.
The process will, perhaps, be more clearly understood
if we consider another mental process which is Univer-
sally acknowledged to be symbolical. I mean the
manipulation of algebraical signs. In all problems in
algebra, I begin by assigning to my constant quanti-
ties a, b, c, etc., values determined by the facts of the
question. I also consider the unknown quantities to
be definite things, whose nature is determined by the
conditions of the question, but whose number is to be
discovered. (Let x stand for the eggs in the basket;
or y for the chance of cutting a given card.) But the
moment I begin my manipulation of the symbols, I for
the time being forget all my knowledge of the real
nature of x and y; a and b. They are now symbols,
and nothing more, to be added together and divided, to
be cubed and eliminated, and to submit to any other


Mental Algebra.
237
manipulation which the laws of algebra allow. Beyond
the symbols I do not for a moment look, till I arrive at
the close of the problem, but when I have at last got
the simple result x = 8 or y = T37, I suddenly again
bethink me of my eggs or my cards, and say that the
number of eggs in the basket was 8, or that the chances
against cutting the card are 37 to 3.
Now all the thinking processes of civilized men are per-
formed by a species of mental algebra. Instead of a and
b, we have words which, until translated into terms of the
sensational or emotional ideas for which they stand, are
equally meaningless. We know that according to laws
which have been discovered by ourselves or others, we
may pass from the word A to the word B, and from that
to the word C. Of course we are only justified in
passing from the word A to the word B if the thing or
sensation whereof A is the name, is always indissolubly
connected in past experience with that whereof B is the
name, and so too with B and C, but at the moment of
reasoning we think not at all of the evidence which
warrants us in passing from A to B, but simply re-
member the formula All A is B, and so too the formula
All B is C. If, indeed, we even analyse so much as this,
and do not rather instantly pass along from word to
word after this fashion, Large-headed baby—water on
the brain—idiotcy or early death.
That which starts the train of reflection or reasoning,


238 A Discourse on Truth.
which as it were gives value to our algebraic symbols,
is always some direct consciousness, a sensation, acti-
vity, or emotion; we are anxious to discover whether
this state of consciousness is or is not connected with
some other—whether the mushroom or fungus in our
hand is or is not poisonous. In order to connect the
fungus with poisonous or non-poisonous qualities, we
run through a string of propositions whereof the last
but one asserts that all things which have a given mark
are poisonous or not as the case may be, which mark
has been, through one or more other propositions,
proved to belong or not to belong to the mushroom
before us; and then the conclusion comes that this
mushroom is or is not poisonous.
This conclusion we translate into real representative
ideas—we imagine ourselves being injured or unharmed
by eating the mushroom, and accordingly either throw it
away, or put it into our basket; but all the intermediate
steps remain combinations of words and of words only.
This is the case if we are quite sure of all our formulae, but
if there be any one of them about which we feel any doubt
we stop midway, and apply to that formula the only
possible test. We translate the proposition into terms
of the picture-ideas for which it stands, and ask ourselves
whether we feel that there is a real connection between
these ideas and on what experience, whether of ourselves
or others, this connection is based. Doubt causes us to


Increased danger of Error. 239
return to the primitive method of the savage, and to use
his slower but surer process.
For it must be admitted that our mental algebra does
greatly increase the possibilities of error. If an erro-
neous combination of ideas be formed by a freak of fancy,
or by neglecting the negative evidence, each time we
view the two ideas together; while we confine ourselves
to picture-thinking, we are likely to discover that the con-
nection between them is not so strong as we imagined,
nor founded on such invariable experience. But when
once that connection is expressed in a verbal formula, as
All Money-lenders are Scamps, that formula is used with-
out any investigation of its force, and may often form
an intermediate link between two ideas which are really
disjoined, and which could not be brought together ex-
cept by this faulty connecting line. And as long as the
proposition is used only as such an intermediate formula,
it will never be translated into terms of picture-ideas
except by him who doubts its validity, and therefore its
faultiness, if it be faulty, will run no risk of discovery.
And this brings us to our second question: Do we on
the whole gain or lose by the substitution of symbolic
for picture-thought? The question might be answered
at once without reference to the immediate facts of the
case by saying, that since the substitution of symbols for
pictures in thought is simultaneous with the growth of
complexity in the surrounding circumstances; Since it


240
A Discourse on Truth.
is at once the product (in common parlance) of these
circumstances and is part of the process of adjustment
to those circumstances; it must, unless it defeats its own
object, render man more fit for his new circumstances,
than he would have been if he had remained unchanged
as to the operations of his mind, while all things around
him moved onward. No step in this process of develop-
ment can be vain or fruitless simply because the process
itself consists in the removal by gradual extinction of all
beings which are less fitted for their new circumstances,
and the survival of those best suited to them. It follows
then that any alteration produced by this process leaves
mankind in a better condition for adjusting themselves
to their new circumstances than they would have been
if the alteration had not been made.
But without betaking ourselves to this ' a priori' and
cavalier method of settling the question, let us attempt
to strike a real balance of gain and loss. We will take
the loss first, and see wherein it consists. We have
already referred to one great inconvenience of symbolic
thought—the impossibility of testing our formulae as we
go along. With this is closely connected another draw-
back. Every formula, be its evidence strong or weak, is
strengthened as a mental formula each time it is used.
Ideas of words, like all other ideas, are connected with a
strength in proportion to the number of times, either the
words themselves or the ideas have been brought into


Gain and Loss.
241
connection in past consciousness. Now the strength of
the connection of the words ought to represent the
strength of the connection of the sensations or things,
which those words are the signs of, as presented in past
experience. But if, as we have seen, each new occasion
on which we use the verbal formula strengthens the
connection of the ideas of the words, it is obvious that
after frequent repetition of that formula an increased
strength of connection between the words will be pro-
duced without any corresponding increase of strength of
connection between the things as presented in experi-
ence. We shall use our formula as worth a good deal
more than it really is. Nor is this all; the name and
that of which it is the name become so indissolubly con-
nected in thought that we often think backwards from
the name to the thing; from an increased strength of
connection between two names we really get an increased
strength of connection between the ideas of the two things
whereof they are the names, and thus lose or impair our
only safe test for the value of our word-formula—The
reading of it back into the representative ideas for which
the words stands. Who does not know that, if he has
used an argument or repeated a story a sufficient number
of times, the validity of the argument or the truth of the
story seems established for him by the mere fact of the
frequent repetition? The words suggest each other with
such facility in their accustomed order, that it is hard
R


242 A Discourse on Truth.
to believe the ideas for which the words stand are not
equally closely combined, and that further this conjunc-
tion of ideas is not due to a clear and undoubted con-
junction of the pheenomena of which those ideas are the
images.
The drawbacks, then, of all word-thinking, as in fact of
all speech, are the exaggeration of experience, by the
assigning of a fictitious strength to connections of ideas,
far higher than that warranted by the connection of
phaenomena themselves in experience, and depending to
a great extent upon the entirely extraneous circumstance
of the number of the times that the proposition represent-
ing this connection has been used in speech or thought—
and further the crystallization of error if an initial mis-
take has been committed.
But against these drawbacks how great are the ad-
vantages! We may safely assert that no discovery
which depended upon any long train of argument would
ever have been made had mankind remained dependent
on picture-thought. Further than that, we may assert
that no book could have been written, and that any
reasoned argument, exceeding a few words in length,
could neither have been uttered nor understood by any
audience. We can reason faster than we can speak
because we can frame the simple notions of words so
much faster than we can utter them, that we have space
in the interval to think of their connections. But let


Gain and Loss.
243
anyone take a simple descriptive or argumentative
sentence and attempt really to form in his mind the
pictures suggested by each separate word which it
contains (excluding, of course, mere qualifying words
which mark not new ideas but variations of an idea), he
will find, I think, that to perform such a task, even in
the most perfunctory manner, will take him a far longer
time than would be necessary for the mere utterance of
the sentence; which yet itself, as we have seen, is
slower than the symbolic thinking thereof.
The difference between symbolic and picture-thought
may be likened to that between travelling by canal-boat
and by express-train. The former is undoubtedly safer,
but, on the other hand, it is so much slower, that it
is admittedly unfitted for the demands of civilised life.
If we stick to the canal-boat we shall escape acci-
dents which may undoubtedly overtake our rivals who
travel express, but if we trade at the same market
they will daily forestall us, and instead of the chance
of a railway smash, we shall have the certainty of
losing our trade, and eventually, if we still adhere to
our old-fashioned means of locomotion, of dying of
hunger.
We are now prepared to deal with the strictures of
the philosophers. These have almost all been mere
tirades against those defects, which we have admitted
to be inherent in symbolic thought, without any attempt
r 2


244 A Discourse on Truth.
at a due appreciation of the countervailing benefits.
Thus, for instance, Bacon, in the 55 th aphorism of the
First Part of the Novum Organon, dilates at length on
the tendency of words to react on thought, and to sub-
stitute their own connections, which for the most part
depend upon the mere casual observation of the vulgar,
for the wider and more important connections of things
which philosophers have observed and would insist
upon. He declares the necessity of referring all such
supposed connections to the test of experience; a useful
caution at a time when verbal connections were apt to
be too lightly and incautiously established, but which
after all is only a caution which could at no time be
applied more than occasionally, and which now-a-days
is perhaps less important than in the time of Bacon,
since through the general diffusion of education, the
opinion of the enlightened acts more directly and fully
upon the mass, and very few new verbal connections
are established which do not accord with the opinion of
the educated classes. Newspaper dicta are substi-
tuted for popular aphorisms, and—sneer who will—the
substitution is that of enlightened opinion for ignorant
guesswork; since the newspaper writer, whatever may
be the defects of his own education, is careful as a rule
to make no statement which shall display ignorancej
that is, which shall be in disaccord with the opinion of
the truly educated. For the rest, Bacon does not touch


Bacon and Locke.
245
upon the question of the value or demerit of verbal sym-
bols as instruments of thought, for the simple reason
that his powerful intellect, being attracted rather to
external nature than to the operations of mind, he had
not proceeded so far in his analysis of thought as to
discover that word-ideas have almost entirely super-
seded the old pictures of phaenomena as instruments
of reason. His criticism is just as far as it goes, but does
not reach the root of the question.
When, however, we pass from Bacon to Locke, the
analysis of thought has made a great step. In the
Essay on the Human Understanding we come across
this passage. "To form a clear notion of truth, it is very
necessary to consider truth of thought and truth of
words, distinctly one from another; but yet it is very
difficult to treat of them asunder; because it is unavoid-
able, in treating of mental propositions, to make use of
words; and then the instances given of mental proposi-
tions cease immediately to be barely mental, and be-
come verbal. For a mental proposition being nothing
but a bare consideration of the ideas as they are in our
minds stripped of names, they lose the nature of purely
mental propositions as soon as they are put into words.
And that which makes it yet harder to treat of mental
and verbal propositions separately, is, that most men, if
not all, in their thinkings and reasonings within them-
selves, make use of words instead of ideas, at least when


246 A Discourse on Truth.
the subject of their meditation contains in it complex
ideas." *
Here then is a glimpse of the true theory which only-
needs the cutting out of all qualifications and exceptions
to make it a precise statement of that which we have been
at such pains to prove. Nor are even these exceptions
without interest. It is quite true that we are more directly
conscious that our thought is merely symbolic when we
are dealing with complex and abstract ideas like those
of Generosity or Benevolence, than we are when con-
cerned with comparatively simple and concrete ones,
such as that of the Dog or of the Horse. The reason of
this is two-fold. In the first place the arousing in our-
selves the complex notion of Generosity involves the
passing rapidly over in the mind a number of other
simpler notions of which it is compounded—those I
mean of a Giver and of a Receiver, of a certain action,
and of the spirit in which it is performed, all of which
form necessary elements of that complex idea. Now it
is obviously impossible that we can have performed all
this complex analysis and running over of simpler
notions in the time that we have formulated or uttered
in a rational discourse the first few syllables of some
such proposition as this, Generosity is a Virtue. We
have really and obviously merely asserted that the
* Locke's 'Essay on the Human Understanding,' Book IV. chapter v.
ad init.


Locke s Doctrine.
names are applicable, the former to the latter, by com-
mon consent of mankind, and we pass immediately to
some other name-connecting formula as we hasten on
towards our conclusion. The notion of Dog or of Horse,
on the other hand, is simply and quickly attained, and it
really would not much delay discourse if we actually did
pause to translate such a term into the idea for which it
stands whenever it occurs; though I apprehend that we
never in fact do so when the term forms one of the con-
necting links of an argument or discourse. In the
second place the notions Dog, Horse, etc., were clearly
formed in the consciousness of man at the time when his
thought was really a series of pictures and not at all
symbolic. When first names were given to these ideas,
they were still always translated when spoken into the
idea whose name they were. Now such complex ideas
as generosity, etc., were not evolved till man had pro-
gressed far in civilization; till his thought was already
becoming daily more entirely symbolic. From the very
beginning these words were frequently used in discourse
and in thought without being translated; the tendency
therefore to translate them will be less strong than that
which urges us to express in ideas words which (or the
prototypes of which) mankind were for ages in the habit
of so translating on every occasion of using them.
So far then, Locke's doctrine, though not exactly in
accordance with our own, is at least to a very consider-


248 A Discourse on Truth.
able extent an anticipation of it, and his very exceptions,
although they seem untenable, do none the less furnish
valuable hints and sidelights with which we may illus
trate our system. But when we come to ask with what
spirit he regards this change in the nature of the thought
of the Human Race which he was at least partially aware
of, we find that he views it with grief and apprehension.
He sees that the Picture-thought is clearer and less liable
to error than the Word-thought, and he at once decides,
without giving the other side a hearing, that the former
is to be preferred to the latter. Perhaps it was impos-
sible for any thinker who had not arrived at the main
principle that all progress is adjustment to varying cir-
cumstances, duly to estimate the importance of rapidity
in mental operations. If it mattered not at what pace
we thought, Picture-thought would still be preferable to
that which we have now adopted. But the fact that a
portion of the progress of mankind is the adoption of this
more rapid if less certain style of thinking, proves irre-
sistibly that the gain in pace more than counterbalances
the increased risk of error in enabling us to fit ourselves
for life in this quickly-changing universe.
As it is with Locke so also is it with almost all subse-
quent philosophers, though they have not all arrived at
his point—the discovery that at least a portion of our
reasoning processes must necessarily be conducted by
means of ideas of words. They all join in the outcry


Common-sense Objections.
249
against the danger of substituting words for thoughts,
and of using words which have no thought behind them
—an outcry which would be perfectly justified, if they
first warned us that we must necessarily do so in most
cases, and that all their declamation really means is this,
that we should never use mental formulae consisting of
words or conjunctions of words, if we have the least
doubt that those conjunctions truly represent a conjunc-
tion of ideas dependent upon direct experience of our-
selves or others. But of this explanation I find no trace
in any of their writings, and without it their arraign-
ment of words and of verbal thought can but confuse
the question and suggest to men's minds that the ideal
of a reasoning process is the simple method of the
savage.
Let us now turn' to the plain common sense of the
vulgar, and ask what it has got to say against our
theory. It is a tribunal to whose decision we attach
much more importance than to any dictum of the
philosophers. It declares at once that when it wishes
to condemn any specious theory as unsound, it is in the
habit of asserting that the reasoning on which such a
theory is based is ' Mere Words.' That if according to
our statement this charge might be truly brought against
reasoning at large, it is at a loss to assign a value to
its expression'of condemnation, which it is yet conscious
is used neither idly nor without meaning. It will not,


250 A Discourse on Truth.
I think, be hard to show, consistently with our theory,
both that Common Sense is justified in its condemnation
of certain forms of argument and what is the precise
meaning of that condemnation.
Arguments which may be condemned as mere words,
are, then, first, and most obviously, those wherein one or
more of the formulae used in the argument consists of
conjunctions of words which are not warranted by the
conjunction in the mind of the ideas which the words
represent, or where that conjunction of ideas, if it does
exist, is a mere reflex of the conjunction of words, and
does not depend upon direct experience. Secondly,
Common Sense frequently rejects an argument as mere
words when, although it can find no such flaw in the
several verbal formula? which are passed through
in order to arrive at the conclusion, it yet feels that the
result is in contradiction to some clear and definite
experience. Here Common Sense occasionally errs in
mistaking some interpretation of experience which it
habitually makes for that experience itself. Thus, for
instance, it might have, and for some time did, affirm
the Copernican theory to be mere words, because it was
in the habit of explaining certain phaenomena which it
daily observed by the supposition that the sun moved
round the earth, although the phaenomena were equally
explicable on the Copernican hypothesis. But I believe
that in a great number, if not in the majority of cases


• Mere Words'
251
Common Sense is justified in rejecting theories wherein
argument is, or seems to be, opposed to direct expe-
rience.
We have already seen that the conjunction between
two ideas as expressed in a proposition can never imply
absolute certainty of the connection of the two phaeno-
mena which the ideas represented, but merely a greater
or less expectation, founded upon a wider and more
uniform or narrower and more chequered experience;
further, that by combining a number of these proposi-
tions to arrive at a result, we shall only be justified in
rising to an expectation of that result, considerably less
than that which belonged to any one of the propositions
which we had used in the process. The justifiable
certainty will decrease with every step of the argument,
and if the intermediate steps be many, the deductive
evidence for the result of the argument will be really
less strong than any well-ascertained direct experience
against, even although it be true that each proposition
in the argument rests its validity not on a single experi-
ence but on many. In such cases as these Common
Sense sees that the conjunction of words in the result
or conclusion of the argument does not represent a
conjunction of ideas or things, but of names and names
only. The contradictory experience prevents the ima-
gination from combining the ideas of the things whose
names are combined in the conclusion, and that con-


A Discourse on Truth.
elusion, although it may be the result of honest and
careful labour, is put aside as a mere sophism. Sooner
or later some new experience will doubtless set limits
to the generality of one of the propositions in the
argument, and will be said to explain the failure of the
deduction, but, as we have over and over again stated,
every universal proposition is for ever liable to some
new limitation.
We see, then, that the two classes of arguments
which Common Sense rejects as mere words are, first,
those which make a wrongful and careless employment
of symbolic thinking; and, secondly, those whose con-
clusion is erroneous by reason of a limitation of
thought, which applies equally to symbolic and to
picture-thinking, although error is less likely to result
in this latter process, simply because it is impossible
to carry on by means of it an argument with any con-
siderable number of terms. In both cases it is by
reason of an obvious flaw in the conclusion that
Common Sense condemns the process. Were the con-
clusion capable of being translated into picture-thought
in a form which should not contradict experience,
Common Sense would accept it at once, and be quite
content with the series of untranslated verbal formulae
through which it was obtained.
Now, we have throughout insisted on the necessity
of the translation of the conclusion into picture-ihought,


Imagination and Reason.
253
and on the fact that men, when they have finished an
argument, do, if they are not hurrying on to another,
habitually so translate their result; so that on this
point, as I hope and believe on all others, Common
Sense and our system are at one.
I promised that our theory, when proved and illus
trated, should be applied to the explanation of some
already observed but as yet unaccounted-for facts. Here
is one of them. It has often been noticed that persons
of a strong imagination are usually of a somewhat
dreamy temperament, and inapt for severe reasoning, and
still more for rapid argument. The explanation is ready
to hand. Such persons still think to a much greater extent
than the majority of their fellow men, by means of real
images. They are poets or painters, men of genius,
perhaps, who delight us with the vividness with which
they see pictures, which we pass by unnoticed. But
none the less is their strength a weakness when con-
sidered as affecting their capacity for running in the
great race of life; unless a surprising vigour of mind
counterbalances, as it has in one or two remarkable
instances, their tendency to adopt a lengthy rather than
a rapid process of thought. Each idea follows its pre-
decessor slowly, and they reach a conclusion long after
other less gifted men have passed far beyond it. Such
men delight us by the beauties of their written works,
but astonish us often by the fatuity of their conversation.


254
A Discotirse on Truth.
Goldsmith was not the only imaginative writer of whom
it might have been truly said:
'Here lies Nolly Goldsmith, for shortness called Noll,
Who wrote like an angel, and talked like poor Poll.'
The substitution of words for images, as the matter of
thought gives also a further explanation of the fact of
which we have already given a partial account in talk-
ing of Causation (p. 161), that poetry which abounds
in natural images belongs rather to a comparatively
early than to an advanced stage of civilization. Poetry
we have still in abundance, but by far the greater part
of it is philosophic (save the mark!), analytic, lyric, or
dramatic; it breaks up emotions into their elements
with Browning, paints their surface with Swinburne,
or describes circumstance and character with Ten-
nyson, in his English pastorals—to my mind by far
the most successful of his many-sided poetical experi-
ments. But all truly imaginative poetry, that which
paints Nature merely for the sake of painting her, and
with no arriere pensee, is with us always more or
less of an exotic, which we may admire for its artistic
perfection, but with which we can hardly sympathise.
The habit of thinking along a succession of images has
through long disuse become difficult.
I know that I am here using the word imaginative in
a sense slightly different from that usually sanctioned
by the critics of poetry; they generally intend to express


Imagination.
255
by this term the allegorical or animistic substitution of
one image for another, the faculty which made Coleridge
hear the voice of a stray child in the plaining wind.
This faculty is more directly sapped by the gradual
destruction of animistic conceptions, than by the substi-
tution of symbols for images; though for its exercise also
we need to linger over the separate images suggested by
the words, and to allow these images to arouse others
by a process of association, which runs upon lines
widely different from those which govern the connection
of the verbal symbols. The faculty of which I first
spoke has, however, full as much right as this latter
one to the name Imaginative. It is the power of repro-
ducing in words images which have been vividly im-
planted on the mind by the outward sense, and implies
a long and loving lingering over those images, without
any attempt to get beyond or behind them. It is this
which Homer possessed above all poets, and which
made him delight to describe the common operations of
every-day life. It is the exact antithesis of that spirit
which induces Wordsworth to blame his Peter Bell,
because—
'A primrose by the river's brim
A yellow primrose was to him;
'Twas that and nothing more.'
It would have been precisely 'that and nothing more'
to Homer, and he would have revelled in the descrip-


256
A Discourse on Truth.
tion of every detail. It is this truly imaginative faculty,
which civilized life, with its disregard of sensible
images, and its hurried rush from symbol to symbol, is
fast and irretrievably destroying;
'Our every gain is purchased by a loss.'
It remains for me to accomplish the most venturesome
part of the work which I sketched out for myself at the
beginning of the chapter, and to lead on for a moment
into a Utopia which, like all other Utopias, seems to its
originator neither difficult of accomplishment, nor un-
likely to issue from the womb of Time. The pathway
into my fabulous region may be made to start from a
fact, which we signalized when we were discussing the
question, how far the reading to oneself written or
printed language could be said to enlarge the whole
amount of a man's experience of audible words. We
there said that although all learners, and probably the
majority of readers throughout their lives, translated
all or some of the written words before them into ideas
of audible sounds as they went along, that certain
accomplished and quick readers performed this operation
of translation rarely if at all, and seemed to get the
sense of the passage by passing the eye rapidly along
from written sign to written sign, without ever for a
moment thinking of the sounds for which those written
signs stood.
Do these readers, then, translate each sign at once


Utopian.
257
into an idea or image of that whereof it is the name
without the intervention of the idea of the spoken
name? I answer that for the most part they do not
translate them at all. The practised mind and eye
passes along those signs, which it is accustomed to see
combined, in exactly the same way as it passes along
the sounds, or ideas of sounds, which it has frequently
before met with in the same combinations. The com-
binations of the written signs, as of the audible, must,
of course, alternately rely for their validity on the com-
binations of the things for which they are signs; but
the mind, for the most part, is content with remem-
bering the fact of past combination, assuming that that
combination is justified by experience, and glides easily
along accustomed strings of written words, only pausing
to translate into terms of representative thought the
conclusion of an argument, or perhaps the outward fact
conveyed by a sentence.
It is to be noticed, that the mind and eye can
pass over a number of written words much faster than
the mind and ear could follow the same words, if it
were possible to articulate them clearly in the same
time. The most rapid speaker does not utter a sentence
nearly so fast as we could read it; but even the clearest
speaker severely strains our attention if his utterance
be rapid. Now, as is the direct experience, so in every
character is the representation of that experience. If
s


A Discourse on Truth.
we can follow along a sentence of written words more
quickly than we could along the same sentence of
spoken words, so too, if other things were equal, we
could follow along a number of mental representations
of written words more quickly than along the same
number of ideas of audible sounds.
At present, doubtless, it is much easier to reproduce in
minds the audible sounds than the written words, simply
because we and our immediate forefathers have had
much wider experience of the former than the latter; but
every year gives a greater proportion of the attention of
mankind at large to written speech, and it is conceiv-
able that the time may come when ideas of written
words shall be substituted for those of audible sounds
as the symbolic matter of thought. The change would
give an increased force of thought with little or no
corresponding disadvantage. There would be no
greater danger of error with the one set of symbols
than with the other, and the only drawback would be,
that we should probably stop less often even than we
now do, to ask whether our formulae were correct. How
much further, and by what other substitutions the
acceleration of symbolic thought may be carried out,
who shall guess?


CHAPTER VIII.
ON NECESSARY TRUTHS.
It will be scarcely necessary to say, after the founda-
tion which I laid down in the first chapter and elsewhere,
that I hold that the conception of Necessary Truth is
absolutely self-contradictory. A Necessary Truth is
ordinarily defined as one of which we are immediately
certain as soon as the terms are presented to us, or as
soon as we conceive together the ideas which the pro-
position connects. Now if the connection between the
two ideas be independent of any direct consciousness,
the proposition conceived as a simple mental conjunc-
tion of ideas will be neither true nor false; it will repre-
sent nothing. Such a mental proposition, could it
exist, would be perhaps a necessary thought, but in
no sense a Necessary Truth. The verbal proposition
stating the conjunction of ideas in the mind would be a
truth, but by no means a necessary one; for whether or
no it be possible to think the reverse of such a supposed
proposition, it would obviously be possible to state this
reverse in words. We should only have to insert or
s 2


260
A Discourse oti Truth.
omit a not. Though perhaps such an unthinkable con-
junction of terms ought not strictly to be called a Pro-
position.
It is true, that if we discovered in our minds two
ideas so closely connected that we could not separate
them in thought, we should immediately conclude that
the mental proposition or conjunction of these two
ideas was true—that it did represent direct conscious-
ness which we or others had had at some past time,
although perhaps we could not at the moment remember
the circumstances of such consciousness. But this con-
clusion of ours would be a mere deduction from the fact
which we had observed in all other cases, that every
strong conjunction of ideas common to a number of
sane men, represented a strong and frequently repeated
conjunction of facts of direct consciousness of one of
the three kinds which we have so often mentioned (Sen-
sation, Emotion, Activity), and this defence of the truth
of the proposition would rob it exactly of that quality
for which its propounders contend—to wit, its necessity
and immediate evidence; our belief in it would be a
consequence of unbroken experience, and without that
experience the belief could not exist.
But in order to make assurance doubly sure on this
point, it will perhaps be well to consider separately the
most important of these supposed Necessary Truths, to
the end that we may see whereon their superior cer-


Three Classes of Necessary Truths. '261
tainty is supposed to rest, and what right they have
to arrogate to themselves this* exalted position. The
ground has been frequently traversed by philosophers;
but since I am not quite satisfied in all cases with the
arguments of the Sensational Philosophers, however
much I may agree with their results; and since, more-
over, I have determined throughout not to pre-suppose
in my readers any wide acquaintance with the writings
of the philosophers, I feel that it behoves me to discuss
some of the more important portions of the subject on
independent grounds.
Dr. Mansel,* the ablest modern exponent of the
school which clings to Necessary Truth, informs us that
Necessity is of three kinds, Logical, Metaphysical, and
Mathematical. Under the head of Logical Necessity
we get the three great Logical Laws of Identity, Contra-
diction, and the Excluded Middle (all A is A. No A is
not A. Everything is either A or not A). Under
Metaphysical Necessity we get as a chief law the Prin-
ciple of Universal Causation. (The second law which
he cites under this latter head has been so frequently
disputed, that it required great boldness to adduce it as
an instance of Necessary Thought). Under Mathe-
matical Necessity we get, of course, all the mathemati-
cal axioms. He mentions a fourth class of necessary
laws, to which he attributes what he calls Physical
* 'Prolegomena Logica,' chapter iii.


262
A Discourse on Trtith.
Necessity; but as this necessity is placed in a much
lower rank than that of the other three, and in a sub-
sequent portion of the book is almost discarded, we
may safely neglect it.
Of the three remaining classes we may notice that we
have already dealt with the law which is taken as the
example of Metaphysical Necessity—that of Causation,
and have proved at some length that it is either mean-
ingless or false. There are left to us to consider the
three Logical Laws and the fundamental axioms of
Mathematics. Of these in their order.
We begin with the Logical Laws; these are said by
their supporters to be not mere truths, arrived at by
thought and experience, but the ultimate and necessary
conditions of all thought. The first of these is the Law
of Identity. Every A or all A is A. Is the belief in
this axiom necessary to human thought? I believe, on
the contrary, that we cannot think it at all. Let us
reduce it to its simplest form, and ask whether it be pos-
sible that we can think that A is A. Let us examine
the question from first principles. All psychologists
are agreed that thought begins with the perception of
difference, that if we lived in a perfectly uniform me-
dium, as, for instance, in perfectly pure water, we could
have no thought at all. 'Idem semper sentire et non
sentire ad unum coincidunt.' Uniformity of conscious-
ness and thought is exactly equivalent to absence of


The Law of Identity.
263
both consciousness and thought. But it may be said
that we think of and perceive identities as well as dif-
ferences; thus, for instance, when I say,' This is the same
dog which I saw yesterday,' my proposition does ob-
viously represent a thought, and the subject of my
thought is an identity. But is it a pure identity? Not
exactly. The dog is the same, but the time when I see
it is different, and it is precisely this difference which
gives a meaning to my thought.
No one in the world would say or think, 'The dog is
the same as I see now,' or, the dog which I see now is
the dog which I see now.' It seems, then, that all
thought is either of pure difference or of identity with
difference, and every proposition which has any meaning
whatsoever, that is, which is the representative of any
real thought, must assert, or at least imply, some kind of
difference. There is an apparent exception to this rule,
in what are called analytic propositions, that is, those
whose predicate is a statement of the whole or a portion
of the meaning of the subject; but the exception is
only apparent. If the predicate be a compound one,
consisting of a number of terms which make up be-
tween them the whole of the meaning of the subject,
and thus form together the definition of that subject, the
proposition is the symbol of the passage of the mind
from one complex whole idea to the simpler elements
of which it is composed taken separately. But these


264
A Discourse on Truth.
simpler ideas when so separated are no more the same
as they were when conjoined in the complex idea, than
oxygen and hydrogen are the same in water as they are
when examined separately. If by electricity we analyse
water into its elements, we have two new things totally
distinct from the old one whence they came. If we
separate a complex idea into its simpler elements, we
perform a piece of mental chemistry of an exactly
analogous character. If, however, the predicate be a
single word, and the proposition be one referring an
Individual, or Subclass to a Natural Kind, it is the
symbol of the passage of the mind from the idea of the
Kind clothed round with the individual variations to
that of the simple Kind-idea denuded of all such
clothing. In all these cases we have difference as well
as identity, and no intelligible proposition can be
framed which does not express or imply some difference
between the subject and the predicate.
What I 'have said here is, in fact, merely another
form of the definition of thought which I have assumed
throughout. Thought, I assert, is the passage of the
mind from one idea to another. Even when I think for
some time of the same person, I think of his different
qualities in succession, or of the different times when I
have met him.* Now the proposition A is A asserts, if
* I cannot refrain from quoting in this place the delightfully vigorous con-
demnation of the law of Identity by Hegel:—" The Law of Identity is virtually


The Law of Identity.
265
it be a proposition at all, that the mind passes from the
subject to the predicate, from A to A. The mind can,
in truth, pass from the thought of A, considered under
one set of circumstances, to the thought of A under
another set of circumstances; but here the circumstances
are supposed to be exactly the same, or the mind is
supposed to move from one point to the same point—a
sufficiently difficult operation. In fact the law of Iden-
tity, so far from being the universal formula for all
thought, is exactly the formula for the negation of
thought. We can only think that A is A by supposing
two A's on different portions of an imaginary bit of
paper and then asserting that they are the same, i. e.
exactly resemble each other. That A is A, when the
two A's are not really two but one, Ave cannot and
never attempt to think.
Mr. Mill, at the very end of the Second Book of his
Logic, gives a somewhat perfunctory examination of the
two remaining logical laws. With regard to the Law
of Contradiction, he seems to me first to state the true
explanation and then, without any sufficient reason, to
self-contradictory, for a proposition always presumes a distinction between
subject and predicate, while the present one does not fulfil what its form
requires. It is asserted that the maxim of Identity, though it cannot be proved,
regulates the consciousness of everyone, and that experience shows that it is
accepted as soon as its terms are apprehended by consciousness. To this pre-
tended experience of the School may be opposed the universal experience that
no mind thinks or forms conceptions, or speaks in accordance with this law.'—
Hegel's Logic, translated by Wallace.


266
A Discourse on Truth.
discard it. He says (Book II. chap. vii. paragraph 4),
'As I have hitherto said nothing of the two axioms
in question (those of Contradiction and the Excluded
Middle), it is not unseasonable to consider them here.
The former asserts that an affirmative proposition and
the corresponding negative cannot both be true [No
A is not-A], which has generally been held to be
intuitively evident. Sir William Hamilton and the
Germans consider it to be a statement in words of a
form or law of our thinking faculty. Other philoso-
phers not less deserving of consideration, deem it to be
an identical proposition; an assertion involved in the
meaning of terms; a mode of denning Negation, and
the word Not.'
'I am able to go one step with these last. An affirm-
ative assertion and its negative are not two independent
assertions connected with each other only as mutually
incompatible. That if the negative be true the affirm-
ative must be false really is a mere identical propo-
sition; for the Negative proposition asserts nothing but
the falsity of the affirmative, and has no other sense or
meaning whatever. The Principium Contradictionis
should, therefore, put off the ambitious phraseology
which gives it the air of a fundamental antithesis per-
vading nature, and should be enunciated in the simpler
form that the same proposition cannot at the same time
be false and true. But I can go no further with the


Mr. Mill on the Law of Contradiction. 267
Nominalists; for I cannot look upon this last as a
merely verbal proposition. I consider it to be like
other axioms, one of our first and most familiar gene-
ralizations from experience. The original foundation
of it I take to be that Belief and Disbelief are two
different mental states excluding one another. This we
know by the simplest observation of our own minds.
And if we carry our observation outwards, we also find
that light and darkness, sound and silence, equality and
inequality, preceding and following, succession and
simultaneousness, any positive phaenomenon whatever
and its negative, are distinct phaenomena pointedly con-
trasted, and the one always absent where the other is
present. I consider the maxim in question to be a
generalization from all these facts.'
Surely a more astonishing paragraph than the fore-
going was never penned by a clear and consistent
thinker. Let us take two of the sentences and compare
them; first we have; 'The former [Law of Contradic-
tion] asserts that an affirmative proposition and the
corresponding negative cannot both be true.' Then, a
little below, 'That if the negative.be true the affirmative
must be false really is a mere identical proposition,' i. e.
a mere case of the law of identity and as valueless as it,
except for the purpose of definition.
In this latter sentence let us substitute for ' false' its
exact equivalent, 'not-true.' The statement then be-


268
A Discotirse on Truth.
comes, 'That if the negative proposition be true, the
affirmative must be not-true, is a mere identical propo-
sition,' or putting it into another form, 'that an affirma-
tive proposition, and its corresponding negative, cannot
both be true, is a mere identical proposition.' But this
very proposition is, according to Mr. Mill's first state-
ment, the proper form (or at least a proper form) of the
Law of Contradiction. The conclusion necessarily fol-
lows that the Law of Contradiction is a mere identical
proposition, and we are rejoiced to think that our
labours are so soon terminated, and that we may put the
Law of Contradiction aside on the shelf with its brother
and prototype The Law of Identity.
Suddenly Mr. Mill tells us he can go no further
with us, which, as he apparently has gone the whole
distance required, is not at all disturbing; but he
thereupon astonishes us by informing us that this
Law of Contradiction which we had just confidently
thrown aside as valueless, is really one of our earliest
generalizations from experience. He says that this
Law rests upon the foundation of the actual obser-
vation of the fact that Belief and Disbelief are two
different and mutually exclusive mental states. Now
if Mr. Mill means by disbelief merely all that is not
belief, belief and disbelief are mutually exclusive in
exactly the same sense as A and not-A are. If I call
one state of thought A, I shall call all thought not


Mr. Mill on the Law of Contradiction. 269
comprehended in that state not-A, until I choose to
break it up further and give different names to its parts;
that No A is not-A, or that belief is not non-belief,
asserts merely that if I have drawn a line round certain
mental tracts, calling all inside A and all outside not-A,
I have excluded all that I have excluded.
But I think Mr. Mill means more than this; belief
and disbelief are not quite the same thing as belief
and non-belief. Certainly most of his instances are
not mere negatives, but rather privatives; they assert
the absence of an expected or imagined quality, or
suggest if they do not actually imply the extreme
opposite of some quality. Yet do these no more
exclude their opposites than any other unlike states.
That light is not darkness is exactly as much
and no more a case of the Law of Contradiction
than that light is not mud, if mud be one of the
things excluded, that is, not included in the notion of
light. All mental states, as long as they occupy con-
sciousness, exclude all others, both those which are and
those which are not directly opposed to them.
Mr. Mill's new Law of Contradiction would really be
very nearly identical with that formulated by Mansel,
'A thing cannot be conceived as having contradictory-
attributes. Contradictory attributes are merely those
which imply the not-being of a given attribute, so that
the law will become in simple form, No thing can have


270
A Discourse 011 Truth.
at the same time one attribute, and another attribute
which implies that that attribute is not present; which
we may reduce to this, 'A thing cannot at the same
time have a given attribute present and absent.' But
this statement, though not identical with the Law of Con-
tradiction, is really merely a case of it. The attribute
is present to consciousness if it be inside the circle on
which I have at the moment centred my thought, all
outside being blank darkness. Now the attribute is
conceived as one thing indivisible in thought, if there-
fore I say an attribute which I have put inside the
lighted circle is not outside it, I merely illustrate that
Law which Mr. Mill asserts to be a mere identity or
definition of negation that, to wit, that no proposition
can be at once false and true, since outside is precisely
equal to not inside, it being impossible to conceive
an attribute as occupying space, and thus lying partly
inside and partly outside of the lighted circle.
The Principle of Contradiction does indeed require
experience for its establishment, but the amount of that
necessary experience is not large. I require just two
differing ideas in order that I may conceive the notion
of difference between one idea and another. When the
notion of difference is once found, the Principle may be
formulated. I notice that A is different from other
things, and therefore can centre my attention upon it so'
as to exclude all other things.


The Excluded Middle.
271
The Principle of the Excluded Middle, Everything is
either A or not A, may be reduced to a case of the Prin-
ciple of Identity even more simply than can the Prin-
ciple of Contradiction. If I have drawn a line round
one portion of consciousness or knowledge, and called it
A, and called every-thing outside that line not-A, then
Everything-less-A and A together make up Everything.
Not-A is purely indefinite—it is simply Everything except
A: I put back to this the A which I have taken away from
it and Everything remains. The statement merely comes
to this: A and everything I know except A make up the
whole of my consciousness. This whole of consciousness
is the whole of consciousness—A is A. Neither do we get
any further by taking the form of the Principle which
Mr. Mill prefers. A proposition must be either false or
true, that is either true or not-true. This, like his second
form of the Law of Contradiction, is not a new form
of the Principle, but merely a special case of it. Re-
stricting my field of observation to propositions I find
that some of them are marked with certain characteristics
in virtue of which I call them true, all other propositions
indifferently I call not-true. I assert then, in accordance
with the Principle of Identity, that a whole made up of
a class of propositions, and all other propositions except
that class make up the whole of propositions. That all
propositions must be either true or not-true propositions,
or that every proposition must be either false or true.


272 A Discourse on Truth.
Mr. Mill, who apparently attaches as little value as I
do to the Law of the Excluded Middle, brings against it
an objection which I do not think will hold. He con-
siders it not only valueless, but also to a great extent un-
true. He says, 'I cannot help thinking this principle a
surprising specimen of a so-called necessity of Thought,
since it is not even true, unless with a large qualifica-
tion. A proposition must be either true or false, pro-
vided that the predicate be one which can in any intelli-
gible sense be attributed to the subject; (and as this is
always assumed to be the case in treatises on logic, the
axiom is always laid down there as of absolute truth.)
"Abdecadabra is a second intention," is neither true nor
false. Between the true and the false there is a third
possibility, the Unmeaning.'
Against this reasoning a supporter of the Principle
might naturally object that, since words are signs of
thoughts, and propositions are signs of the connections
or disjunctions of thoughts, a so-called meaningless
proposition, not being the symbol of any such connec-
tion or disjunction, is not in fact a proposition at all.
Moreover he might urge that even taking Mr. Mill's
example as a legitimate one he fails to make out his
case. If a certain number of things are called 'Second
Intentions,' then all other things will be called not-second-
intentions according to the principle which we have laid
down above. Then of the two contradictory proposi-


Mathematical Truths,
273
tions—Abdecadabra is a second intention,—Abdecadabra
is not a second intention,—the former will be false and the
latter true. Holding as we do that the Principle of the
Extended Middle is a mere case of the Principle of Iden-
tity, we must needs hold that it is universally true and
for the same reason that it is invariably valueless.
But the most severe portion of our task is not yet ac-
complished. There remain to us for discussion the
mathematical axioms. It is sufficiently obvious that
these are neither untrue nor unmeaning. It is clear
then that we cannot dispose of them in the same sum-
mary fashion, as that with which we have treated the
other so-called Necessary Truths. We must attempt to
go to the very root of the matter, and this we can only
do by examining the real nature of the object-matter to
which these laws apply. I shall confine myself in this
place to examining the nature of the object-matter of
one of them—Arithmetic. This object-matter is obvi-
ously Number, and I shall discuss that only, and abstain
from entering into a further discussion of the object-
matter of Geometry for several reasons.
In the first place arithmetical conceptions seem to be
necessary for the due understanding of even the first prin-
ciples of Geometry. Two straight lines cannot enclose a
space. A triangle is a plane figure enclosed by three
straight lines. Now the converse is not true, there are no
geometrical ideas involved in Simple Arithmetic, whatever
T


274
A Discourse on Truth.
there may be in the higher algebra. It would be quite
possible to be a proficient in arithmetic without knowing
a word of geometry, or having conceived a single notion
of the relations' of things in space, but without numerical
notions geometry would be impossible. It is true that
when the simple numerical notions were once formed
and applied to the measurement of space, the science of
Geometry, by reason of its more concrete nature, and the
possibility of aiding the mind by the use of diagrams,
became easier than its sister Arithmetic and therefore
was the earlier carried to something like perfection, but
this makes nothing against our statement.
In the second place the reduction of the geometrical
axioms to generalizations from experience seems to me to
have been much more satisfactorily made out than that of
the arithmetical laws. That two straight lines cannot en-
close a space is a fact which if not exactly proved to us'
by our daily experience (since we never see exactly
straight lines) is at least suggested by such a number of
extremely similar experiences, that whether or no we
should believe the statement as soon as we heard it, we
may be sure that, if we disbelieved it at first, experience
would soon assure us of its truth. Since then it is a
canon of philosophy not to assume more laws than are
absolutely needed to explain our facts, and since the
belief in the geometrical axioms may be explained in the
same way as all those other beliefs which are confessedly


Arithmetic and Geometry. 275
derived from experience, it would be unphilosophical to
explain this belief, by the assumption of any such new
fashion of gaining it as the immediate intuition of the
necessary conjunction of two ideas the moment they are
presented to consciousness.
Now is the same method possible with regard to num-
bers? Mr. Mill says that it is. That I learn that two
and one is three by comparing two apples and one apple
separately with the same apples placed together. Other
philosophers, arguing on the same grounds, have asserted
of the arithmetical axioms what Mr. Mill attempts to
prove of the geometrical, to wit, that they are never
exactly true. Even as the statement that two straight
lines cannot enclose a space depends upon the implied
assumption that it is possible to get in experience two
exactly straight lines, an assumption which is never
precisely verified; so the assertion that one and two is
equal to three, if considered as a statement about any
given things, assumes that each of the three units is
precisely equal. Now as no two things in nature are
precisely equal, the assertion, it is argued, is only
roughly and not precisely correct.
The argument would be irrefragable if number really
belonged to things in the same sense as colour or
shape does. But it seems to me more than doubtful
whether this is the case. In the first place every quality
of a thing remains the same unless some change has
T. 2


276
A Discourse on Truth.
taken place in the thing itself; a triangle remains a
triangle, and a dirty plate a dirty plate, unless I cut
off a corner of the one or wash the other. Now if I
have a quantity of oranges on the table before me and
subsequently place another by the side of them not
touching any one of them, it is clear that no change has
taken place in any of the oranges, yet is their number
altered. Number then can be changed by an alteration
which does not in any way directly affect any of the
things previously numbered. Moreover, the fact that
we count as freely and habitually things of entirely dif
ferent sizes as those which are nearly uniform, and
assert that two toy terriers and a St. Bernard make three
dogs, as readily as that two damsons and a third make
three damsons, seems to point to the conclusion
that numerical equality is not and is not imagined
to be the same thing as quantitative or geometrical
equality.
Now the whole argument I have quoted above, and at
least the illustration of Mill,* require the assumptions
that these two equalities are really one and the same,
and that number is a quality of things. Since then the
proofs of the Sensationalist writers of the experiential
derivation of numerical axioms seem either to be based
on doubtful assumptions, or at least to lack clearness
and cogency, we must begin the investigation of them
*, Cf. Mill, 'Logic,' Book II. chap. vi. sec. 2.


The Nature of Number.
277
afresh with such light as we may be able to borrow from
other sources.
The most philosophical treatment of the question of
the true nature of Number occurs in a treatise, the whole
of the phraseology, and the greater part of the doctrines
of which are diametrically opposed to the positions
which I have taken up in this book, 'Mansel's Prole-
gomena Logica.' * Since, however, his results, which
I believe do not in fact greatly differ from my own, are
expressed in language which implies, what I be-
lieve to be entirely erroneous theories of the nature
of thought, I must attempt a solution which, in form at
least, will differ from his. We may start, however,
from the same point, and begin by admitting that our
first notion of number is got from succession of
sensations, or, more strictly, from succession of
markedly distinct sensations; number is, in fact, dis-
tinction, and the first number is not 1 but 2, as the
ancients well knew, though our philosophers and
mathematicians often ignore this all-important fact.
But although the first notion of number and the first
number itself was got by noticing a distinction be-
tween two successive sensations, I do not think that
either the higher numbers or any of the axioms of
arithmetic could be derived from this source alone.
Successive sensation could only give us numerical
* Mansel, 'Prolegomena Logica,' chap. iv. pp. 114-125.


278
A Discourse on Truth.
statements in this simple form: Sensation A and the
next sensation, B, are distinct, or two; so also are
sensation B and sensation C. As long as the sensations
are truly successive, I can only compare A and B, and
B and C. I can never discover any relation connecting-
A, B, and C, since A has by hypothesis vanished before
C has appeared in consciousness.
We have so far, then, got but little way towards
our goal; we have found Number, but only one
number, and no laws as to the combination of num-
bers. How, then, do we take the next step? I think
in this way. We have one organ of sense, the eye,
which takes in, in what seems at least to be a single
complex sensation, a whole varied plane of colours,
on each part of which, distinguished by some differ-
ence, we may, if we choose, concentrate our attention.
I look at the flag of Italy; I seem to see at one
glance a varied mass of colour; but I may, if I
choose, look first at the red, and observe its differ-
ence from the white, in virtue of which I say the
colours are two, and repeat the same process when
I rest my eye on the spot where the green joins the
white. Now, during the whole time of this operation,
the whole flag has been present to me, though my atten-
tion has been occupied by its successive parts. At the
end I view the whole flag again, and find that the whole
visual space occupied by the complex image of the flag


Numbers higher than Two. 279
is the same as that occupied by the successive colours
which, with their differences, I have examined. I have
got before me a complex sensation which, as I have
discovered, represents a repeated potential distinction
between its parts whensoever I choose to cast my eye
down it from top to bottom. This coloured space with
a repeated potential distinction I require a new name
for; I call it therefore 'three colours.' In the same
way, if I found three possible distinctions in passing
from top to bottom of the visual plane, I should say
there were four colours.
It is then the simultaneous combination in one
complex sensation of a number of elements which
may themselves, by reason of their marked differences,
be distinguished from each other and from successive
sensations, that gives us all notions of the higher
numbers.
The same experience acquaints us with the arith-
metical laws. If I take a variously coloured plane
and notice a marked dividing line of colour running
down the middle of it, I shall in accordance with
the method which we have described, say that so
far it consists of two parts, that is, that there is a
sufficiently marked distinction between the two halves
of it for me to concentrate my attention alternately
on one and on the other, and to discover a difference
in passing from one to the other. If, further, in


280 A Discourse on Truth.
directing my attention to each one of these two parts
separately, I discover that each is capable in the same
way of yielding successive and distinct sensations, I
shall say that each of these halves itself consists of two
parts. Now if I recombine the picture, and run my
eye rapidly down it from top to bottom, noticing as I
go the distinctions I have made, and counting them by
means of the conceptions of number which I have
already got, I shall find that there are three divisions
or four things; and I shall, by comparing this with my
former process, be able to say that to divide a thing
into two parts, and to divide each of these two parts
into two, is the same in result as at once to divide the
thing into four parts. It is from succession combined
with simultaneity that I get all my notions of arith-
metic*
It may be argued that we might as well derive our
notions of number from successive sensations combined
with the memory of past sensations. I willingly admit
that had we no other means of getting the higher
notions of number we might derive them from this
source, though how far without the aid of the eye we
* Since writing this I have noticed that the same doctrine is propounded by
Mr. Green in his Introduction to 'Hume's Treatise on Human Nature,'
sec. 257, etc., but the proof of it is not given, as indeed it was not there
required. Mr. Mill's argument about two and three pebbles, although it seems
at first sight to resemble ours, is in reality diametrically opposite to it. He
assumes that a change in number involves a change in things, I, that it involves
merely an act of mind.


Numbers higher thati Two. 281
should be able to get the notions of the combinations of
the numbers and the laws of arithmetic I think it would
be hard to determine. But in the first place it would be
hard to discover any suggestion in mere memory of
sensation which should impel us to enumerate these
memories, while the fact of the several visual divisions
being at the same time presented in a complex whole
suggests to us immediately to give to that whole a
name which shall mark the fact that it contains within
it these divisions; in other words, to call it a number.
In the next place, wherever a belief or notion may be
derived indifferently from direct consciousness and from
mere representative or ideal consciousness, that is, from
imagination or memory, it is always preferable to
decide that it is due to the direct consciousness; since,
other things being equal, consciousness and its connec-
tions are much more vivid than the ideal consciousness
and its connections, and therefore the former are much
more likely to produce a notion or belief than the latter.
But it may be objected that after all we have brought
back number and its laws to experience, since it is
merely an experience of the different colours in the
plane of sight presented to us which induces us' to
divide that plane. After all our long circumbendibus,
we seem merely to have arrived at the simple statement
that Number is derived from counting colours in a
picture or single presentation of sight. If this were in


282
A Discourse on Truth.
truth our result we should certainly have proved our-
selves the most inept of reasoners, since in order to
count you must first have the notion of all numbers.
But if the notion of number is in any way derived from
mere observation of that which is presented to us by
external vision, all that the sensationalist philosophers
desire to prove will be established. Number will be
shown to be necessarily a quality of things, and how-
ever great be the difficulties of this view we shall have
to accept it, and to swallow the difficulties as best we
can.
The question, then, is, Is the number which I discover
in the diversely coloured plane which is at every
moment presented to my view, or do I bring it from
my mind and add it to that view? I answer unhesi-
tatingly that the latter solution is the true one. In the
special instance we took, that of the flag of Italy, the
number of colours seemed to be, as it really was, in the
thing; but the explanation of this fact is merely that in
order to study this flag, I had already arbitrarily cut it
off from all other things which really would be pre-
sented along with it at any given moment of sight. If,
however, I placed my eyes so near to it that it really
covered the whole range of sight, I should then most
certainly not have three distinctions, but an innumerable
quantity according as the light struck one portion more
than another, and a thousand other such causes.


Number the work of the Mind.
283
It is true that the lines between the main colours
would be the most marked distinctions, and I should
probably still say that there were three colours, and
three only; but this would only mean that there
being a countless multitude of potential states to be
got out of the single complex picture before me, I
chose to concentrate my attention on only three of
those successively; to mark definitely in my mind
two passages of distinction in descending from red
to green through white. I might have made a much
larger number of divisions, or I might have attended
only to the stronger of the two contrasts. The num-
ber of colours which appear to me in one presen-
tation of sight at any moment correspond precisely
to the number of distinctions which I have chosen to
draw, and might have been either more or fewer at my
will.
Let any one ask himself how many things there
are on the table. He will get on very well with the
more obviously distinct things—the books and the
inkstand, but when he goes a little further, and asks
whether he ought to count the wafers in their box or
the spots on the table-cloth, he is in difficulties. The
fact is, any answer to such a question would be equally
true, from one up to ten million, though all answers
would not be equally in accordance with common par-
lance, since it is obvious that all men would make a


284
A Discourse on Truth.
book a distinct division or unit in the number, and
would not make a crumb or a grain of dust one. But
within these extreme limits there would be a number of
possible answers, any one of which would accord suffi-
ciently well with common parlance.
Is number, then, entirely arbitrary? Not at all. We
always have reasons for drawing or omitting to draw a
dividing line, though the reasons are not the same in all
cases. In the first place, if any portion of complex
visual presentation has frequently been seen by us in
other combinations, our attention is naturally attracted
to it, and we divide it off from the other parts of the
picture and make it one thing. Still more is this the
case if we know that it can at any moment be removed
from the picture, all the other things remaining the
same. We generally draw lines round or constitute
units all moveable things, though even this rule is not
without exceptions where the moveable things are small
and form portions of one apparently uniform whole.
Amongst the elements of a picture we should count as
one the sand and not each grain thereof, or even a
handful of corn rather than the single grain, although
these might be so few that there would be no difficulty
in counting them.
It is the truth that men begin by considering as units
only those parts of the picture that they know are move-
able, which furnishes an explanation of the fact that in


Units generally Separable. 285
many languages numbers do not exist independently,
but only as a species of adjuncts of the names of objects
which very early experience has shown to be moveable,
generally those which are themselves capable of mo-
tion; thus, with certain tribes in the Malay Peninsula,
in order to express two books or three hats, you have to
say two-man books or three-man hats. The observa-
tion that many races independently got their notions of
number from their fingers and toes is another illustra-
tion of our argument. With the savage (though perhaps
not with us) both fingers and toes are freely moveable,
and they were to him an instance of moveable things
which he carried ever about with him. The other
qualities, according to which man made division of the
whole picture before him, came later, and are even to
this day more variable. Vivid distinctions of colour are
perhaps the most important, but it seems always diffi-
cult to conceive as two, things which we have never seen
separated. We can count the branches of the tree and
conceive them distinctly as a number, for we have seen
them lopped off, but the ordinary man is apt to consider
the flower as one whole and would not break it up into
parts in thought, whereas the botanist undoubtedly
would.
But however suggested, by peculiarities of our pur-
suits or past experience, the breaking up of the complex
whole of sensation into its parts so as to constitute it a


286
A Discourse on Truth.
number is always a definite determination or activity of
the mind itself. The idea of any number is the concep-
tion of a whole combined with the consciousness that
the mind has broken up that whole into parts, and fixed
its attention on each of the parts separately. The con-
sciousness of the different lines of division thus drawn
survives when the picture is again viewed as a whole;
now no longer an indeterminate whole, but one made up
of distinct parts. The conceptions of Number and the
Laws of number are indeed drawn from experience, but
it is merely the experience of certain activities of the
mind, of its capacity of combining the results of re-
peated activities, and of the observed laws of these com-
binations. Number is the result of human thought and
no quality of external things. Mansel, and his master
Kant, who call succession a form of thought and derive
number from it, are at all events nearer the mark
than those who seek for it an origin in sensational
experience.
The fact that the conception of a number involves a
whole present to consciousness, of which each of the
parts and the dividing lines between them remain dis-
tinct in that consciousness, fixes a very narrow limit to
the numbers of which we have any real notion. I can
form a perfectly clear mental picture of my five fingers,
and in this picture can perceive at the same moment, or
at least what seems to be the same moment, all the


Limit of Conceivable Numbers.
287
lines of demarcation; but I find it much harder to
conceive distinctly as one picture ten objects of any
kind, with all their dividing lines. I am not quite
certain that I have really a distinct mental picture of
a whole broken up into ten parts, so that I could
instantaneously recognize the difference between it and
a whole divided into eleven such parts. I am quite
certain that of the higher numbers I have no ideas
whatsoever. I can talk of them, since I have their
names, or I can reason about them, by extending to
them laws which I have found true of smaller numbers,
but the very method by which I carry out this extension
proves to me that I have no real notions of these higher
symbols as numbers in the proper sense, that is, as
wholes broken up into parts, and with each of the parts
distinct in the mental pictures of these wholes.
If I wish to add 23 to 35, I first add three, of which I
have a definite conception, to five, of which also I have
a clear notion, and arrive at 8, which too I can picture
to myself. But in order to add the twenty to the thirty,
what do I do r I conceive each ten as a whole undi-
vided mass, and do not attempt to think of its parts, but
merely of the fact that twenty is the name for two such
masses, and thirty for three; now I can add these two
complex wholes, one consisting of two parts and the
other of three, in exactly the same way as before, and
conceive the result, five, which I put down. My answer


288
A Discourse on Truth.
then truly is, 'two masses which are not broken up, and
three masses which are not broken up, are equal to five
unbroken masses. Each of these masses may be broken
up into ten equal parts, of which each part is conceived
as equal to each of the parts of the complex whole
eight which I got at by the addition of the unit
column.'
It may be asked, Does the statement that an army
consists of 50,000 men convey to us no idea? I
answer, None whatever by itself, except of a huge
mass. If, however, we are told that one army consisted
of 50,000 and the opposing one of 100,000 men, the two
statements together do convey a definite idea. We im-
agine two huge masses, whereof the one covered twice
as much ground, or was twice as powerful as the other.
It is only when we can get a relation between two or
more of these large symbolic numbers, which relation
we can express in terms of thinkable numbers, that
their names suggest to us any ideas except those of
indeterminate multitude.
So far I believe that my treatment of the subject does
not differ greatly in essentials from that of Dr. Mansel.
We have now to ask in what sense these laws of num-
bers or of certain mental activities and their results can
be called necessary laws. Dr. Mansel says that they
are so because they condition all human thought;
three and four must be seven to all men. The fact is


How far are Laws of Number Necessary f 289
that the statement is not even true; to a good many
savages and men of low civilization three and four are
not seven but an indefinitely large number; their
powers of keeping in their imaginations several divi-
sions of the whole picture before them do not rise to this
point.
That to every human being, who can form the idea
of seven, three and four or two and five indifferently
constitute that number is probably true; but this seems
to me only to point to the fact, which one might
naturally have expected before it was observed, that the
activities of different individuals of the same species
greatly resemble one another, and that the more im-
portant of them seem identical in all members of the
species. All men digest their food in the same fashion,
and move their lungs according to the same general
laws; they may have a better or worse digestion and so
they may be better or worse arithmeticians; but no one
considers the laws which govern the action of the lungs
or digestion to be in any sense necessary or that we
derive our knowledge of them from anything except
experience. The laws of number will doubtless remain
the same as long as man remains what he is, but so
also will the laws of digestion.
It is true that I can without difficulty fancy the laws
of digestion altered, and that it is extremely difficult,
if not absolutely impossible, to conceive any change
u


290
A Discourse on Truth.
in the laws of number; but this difficulty arises simply
from the fact that in the latter case thought has to
judge of one of its own activities, and in the former of
that of an entirely different organ.
If Dr. Mansel merely meant by the word Necessary
that in which a change was inconceivable to thought, we
should not be inclined to quarrel with him, though we
should prefer to say, 'extremely difficult to conceive.'
But this inconceivability, since it merely arises from the
close connection between the judge and the thing
judged, does not in any way involve any greater sta-
bility of the law than of any other observed fact what-
soever. We might lose to-morrow our power of forming
a conception of a whole distinct into parts, and then num-
ber and its laws would be absolutely nonexistent. We
should then be different from our present selves, and we
cannot conceive ourselves as aught else—yet we change
daily. Neither has this inconceivability of the negative
of these laws any bearing on the question of their deri-
vation or evidence. They, like all other laws, arise from
the experience of consciousness, and depend for their force
on the frequency and strength of that experience. It is
not indeed experience of sensation, but of activity that
I get. It is experience none the less.


CHAPTER IX.
EPILOGUE.
Before summing up the results of our task it may be
well to say a few words as to an objection which with
some show of reason might be urged against our
method. A critic might remark that even in our attempt
to reduce Causation to a merely subjective existence—
to show that it was a mere fashion in which we
looked at phaenomena, we have really assumed its
objective or external nature. We have continually
spoken of the action of experience in establishing in-
ternal connections of ideas, and of the law of the con-
tinued adjustment of the race to its circumstances.
Now both these expressions involve the notion of that
very external nature of cause which we have taken upon
ourselves to disprove, so that our conclusion is in fact
contradicted by our premises.
It might be a sufficient answer to this objection to
observe that in a work avowedly sceptical it is the
negative and not the positive portion of the argument
which is intended to be of weight. If from premises
U 2


292
A Discourse on Truth.
which assume the objective or external nature of cause
I can legitimately draw a conclusion which asserts its
merely subjective or internal nature, then my premises
and my conclusion balance one another. The contra-
diction between the two proves that there is something-
self-contradictory in the premises, though it does not
give me reason for affirming that the conclusion is to be
preferred before them. The mind is reduced to a state
of balance or doubt between two inconsistent opinions
which both apparently rest on the same evidence—in
other words, to a state of pure scepticism in the proper
meaning of that term. The method of Hume, and
before him of the Pyrrhonists, was precisely this: to
take the ordinarily accepted dogmas and to draw from
them conclusions contradictory to those dogmas. I may
safely assert that the ordinary external theory of causa-
tion is as commonly assumed by Hume as by any
writer who held that theory in its crudest form—and
further that Hume's method entirely justified him in
that assumption.
But I think that I am not forced to take up this un-
assailable but purely negative ground. I believe that
my own theory rests merely on historical evidence of
the progress of the race, and as long as it pretends to be
nothing more than an historical theory, and to make no
assertions as to the future, needs no assumption whatso-
ever as to the nature of cause. By studying history I


I
Historical Standpoint.
293
get constant evidence of the external circumstances of
the individual and of the race changing, and of the
internal ideas and beliefs changing therewith. But this
historical observation, which is all I need to establish
my conclusion, is susceptible of many explanations, as
to all of which I may, nay must, on my own principles,
observe a pure impartiality.
The facts may be accounted for either by the ordinary
theory of direct action of the circumstances on the mind,
or by the Liebnitzian doctrine that the soul and its
external circumstances, which really are entirely inde-
pendent, have been so fashioned by their Maker as
to run parallel like two clocks set together at the be-
ginning and keeping accurate time; a theory which, if
carried to its logical conclusion, would destroy all causes
but one—God.
It would not even be necessary for the explanation
of the facts to assume that the distinction between
the circumstances and the self was real; the facts as
observed might equally be explained on the extreme
Ideal theory of the real unity between self and circum-
stance; on such a theory the concurrent progresses of
the external and internal would become merely two
sides of the same thing, and all necessity of introducing
Cause to explain their constant relation would vanish.
Do I then incline to this latter theory? Most decidedly
not, and simply because it is one propounded by Reason,


294
A Discourse on Truth.
and (like all the rest) going beyond the evidence on
which Reason depends for its conclusions—that of direct
consciousness.
All that I have concerned myself directly with in
this treatise is to show that the historical data on
which all the theories equally are founded is, if pro-
perly treated, destructive of one of them, that, to wit,
most commonly accepted, of constantly recurring objec-
tive causation. I hold, and must needs hold, that the
same destructive criticism might equally well have been
applied to any of the others. That I have frequently
used language implying the very theory which I seek to
destroy I freely admit, nor is this wonderful, when the
fact which I have already pointed out is duly considered
—that language was formed when an extreme and now
universally rejected version of this theory was uni-
versally held. It would be equally impossible for me
to find words on this subject which did not imply this
original theory of causation, as it would for a divine to
preach a sermon in which he should avoid all language
implying the corporeal nature of the Soul. Yet is there
one among them who now holds that the Soul is a body?
Let him who blames me on this score listen attentively
to the next sermon he hears, and let the lesson of charity
it conveys sink deep into his heart.
Putting aside then this objection, let us inquire what
is the net result of our analysis. It may be stated in a


Reason is Instrumental. 295
very few words. The office of the Reason is instru-
mental and not ultimately judicial. That is the last
word, as it was almost the first, of Scepticism. Reason
can take the facts of experience and arrange and re-
arrange them as suits best the interests of the man, but
she can in no way go behind them. The expectation
which arises from those facts is itself in no way rational,
and although the results of reason may often alter the
amount of expectation or turn that expectation towards a
new quarter, by insisting upon an unobserved experience
or on the importance of the experience of others, the
reason can give no ultimate basis to the expectation.
Any hypothesis which reason throws out as an attempt
to explain experience must for ever rest unproved and
unprovable. I mean not of course such general prin-
ciples as the Law of Gravity, etc., which, as I have
attempted to show, are not strictly explanations of
experience, but merely a succinct fashion of stating a
common element in a number of experiences. Such
expectation as belongs to these laws results, not from the
action of reason, but from the direct connections of
experience which the laws sum up.
The explanations of which I spoke above are those
which do not merely connect a number of experiences,
but are supposed to give a groundwork or rational
foundation to experience itself. They belong equally to
all Schools; they appear in Forms of Thought and


296 A Discourse on Truth.
Sensation with Kant, in the Uniformity of Nature with
Mill, in the Pre-established Harmony with Liebnitz.
They are all very ingenious and pretty, but they all
labour under one incurable defect; they are transgres-
sions of Reason beyond her province.
There remains one question on which perhaps it is
needful to enter, though any difficulty which may arrive
with regard to it will depend rather upon the acci-
dental double use of a word, than upon any more im-
portant foundation. How far does philosophical Scepti-
cism necessitate or conduce to unbelief in matters of
Religion?
The answer may be stated boldly. There is one
form of Religion, and one only, which philosophical
Scepticism would sweep to the winds—that which pre-
tends to be purely rational, to found itself entirely upon
Reason, and to make no demands upon that Faith
which is the evidence of things not seen. The doctrines
of Religion, since they are not certainly given in
experience, must be either to be evolved by reason from
experience, or must be given to some other faculty of
mind or Soul in a fashion which transcends all ex-
perience. To the first of these two theories, Philosophic
Scepticism returns an unhesitating negative, but when
the second is stated she humbly bows her head, and
presumes rot to judge beyond her province. Against
the theologico-philosophic theory which makes of God


Relation to Theology.
297
the# Great First Cause she protests loudly; against the
Christian doctrine, which states that he is the intelligent
framer of the Universe, she has nought to say, except
that that doctrine contains difficulties which must be
surmounted, not by Reason, but by Faith, an exception
which surely the Divines have always been willing to
allow, and may well grant to that School which denies
to Reason her usurped authority of judging of the
results of Faith.
Those who think that in losing the rotten prop of the
rejected philosophic doctrine, Religion has received a
serious damage, may do well to consider that Religion
subsisted and was strong for hundreds of years in the
minds of the Jew and the early Christian without such
adventitious aid, and that even to this day ninety-nine
out of a hundred sincere believers are unaware of the
existence of this supposed bulwark of the Faith.
To take a concrete case, that of the alleged per-
formance of a miracle. Dogmatic Philosophy would
be inclined to say that a violation of the Laws of
Nature was impossible. Pure Scepticism would de-
clare that the so-called Laws of Nature were merely
an historical statement of the experience of a multi-
tude of men; that there could be no impossibility in
the coming-into-being of any new experience what-
soever, although the fact that this new experience was
opposed to a very common one would render it hard for


298 A Discourse on Truth.
all men (including the sceptic himself) to believe in it.
But this difficulty of belief will in no way affect the
objective likelihood of the phaenomenon, but will merely
be another side of the fact that this phaenomenon is un-
common, a fact which the asserters of the miracle will
not be in any wise inclined to dispute, since otherwise
it would not be a miracle at all. Scepticism will then
leave the question to be argued out either on the
narrowly rational ground of the credibility of the wit-
nesses, or the wider religious ground of the spiritual
value and moral import of the miracle itself. The
sceptic himself will at least not be hindered by his
philosophic position from accepting any creed which
involves, as all the widely accepted creeds' do, some
belief in the occasional disturbance of the order of
Nature by the direct interposition of a higher will.
Further than this he will seek in every religion, as the
distinguishing mark of its religious character, some
mystery or mysteries which soar beyond the range of
the Understanding and appeal directly to the Faith.
A good metaphor is worth a volume of argument.
Let us say then that Scepticism is the Sheep-dog of
Philosophy, and that his task is to keep the Reason
within the pleasant fold of the Arts and Sciences. The
Reason is an unruly and venturesome sheep, and is for
ever trying to stray away into the wilderness of Meta-
physics. Up starts Scepticism, barks at her, and drives


A bold Metaphor.
299
her back; but scarcely has he lain him down again,
when she tries to break out afresh in some new direc-
tion. It seems however that each succeeding attempt is
less venturesome and more half-hearted than its pre-
decessor, and that the duties of the Sheep-dog require
ever less activity and vigilance. It may perhaps be
hoped that the time will come when Reason will graze
contentedly in her pleasant pasture, and the faithful
Sheep-dog Scepticism may lie down—sleep—and be
forgotten.
BRADBURY, AGNEW, & CO., PRINTERS, WHITEFRIARS.


i


65, Comhill, and l, Paternoster Square,
London, December, 1876.
A LIST OF
HENRY S. KING AND CO.'S
PUBLICATIONS.
ABBEY (Henry).
Ballads of Good Deeds,
and Other Verses. Fcap. 8vo.
Cloth gilt, price 5s.
ABDULLA (Hakayit).
Autobiography of a Malay
Munshi. Translated by J. T.
Thomson, F. R. G. S. With Photo-
lithograph Page of Abdulla's MS.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price i2s.
ADAMS (A. L.), M.A., M.B,
F.R.S., F.G.S.
Field and Forest Rambles
of a Naturalist in New Bruns-
wick. With Notes and Observations
0ri the Natural History of Eastern
Canada. Illustrated. 8vo. Cloth,
price i4 f.
ADAMS (F. O.), F.R.G.S.
The History of Japan. From
the Earliest Period to the Present
Time. New Edition, revised. 2
volumes. With Maps and Plans.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 2is. each.
ADAMS (W. D., Jun.).
Lyrics of Love, from Shake-
speare to Tennyson. Selected and
arranged by. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth extra,
gilt edges, price 3f. 6d,
ADAMS (John), M.A.
St. Malo's Quest, and
other Poems, Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, 5s.
ADON.
Through Storm & Sunshine.
Illustrated by M. E. Edwards,
A. T. H. Paterson, and the Author.
Crown 8vo Cloth, price 7f. 6d. ,
A. K. H. B.
A Scotch Communion Sun-
day, to which are added Certain
Discourses from a University City.
By the Author of " The Recreations
of a Country Parson." Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
ALLEN (Rev. R.), M.A.
Abraham; his Life, Times,
and Travels, as told by a Contem-
porary 3,800 years ago. With Map.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price i0s. 6d. -
AMOS (Prof. Sheldon).
Science of Law. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
5s.
Volume X. of The International
Scientific Series.
ANDERSON (Rev. C), M.A.
New Readings of Old
Parables. Demy 8yo. Cloth, price
4s. 6d.
Church Thought and
Church Work. Edited by. Second
Edition. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price
js. 6d.
Words and Works in a
London Parish. Edited by.
Second Edition. Demy 8vo. Cloth,
price 6s,
The Curate of Shyre. Se-
cond Edition. 8vo. Cloth, price
js. 6d.
ANDERSON (Col. R. P.).
Victories and Defeats. An
Attempt to explain the Causes which
have led to them. An Officer's
Manual. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price
i4f.
ANDERSON (R. C), C.E.
Tables for Facilitating the
Calculation of every Detail in
connection with Earthen and
Masonry Damf. Royal 8vo. Cloth,
price 2f.


2
A List of
ANSON (Lieut.-Col. The Hon.
A.), V.C., M.P.
The Abolition of Purchase
and the Army Regulation Bill of
i87i. Crown 8vo. Sewed, price is.
Army Reserves and Militia
Reforms. Crown 8vo. Sewed,
price u.
Story of the Supersessions.
Crown 8vo. Sewed, price 6d.
ARCHER (Thomas).
About my Father's
Business. Work amidst the Sick,
the Sad, and the Sorrowing. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5$.
ARGYLE (Duke of).
Speeches on the Second
Reading of the Church Patron-
age (Scotland) Bill in the House of
Lords, June 2, i874; and Earl of
Camperdown's Amendment, June 9,
i874, placing the Election of
M misters in the hands of Ratepayers.
Crown 8vo. Sewed, price is.
Army of the North German
Confederation.
A Brief Description of its Organi-
zation, of the Different Branches
of the Service and their rdle in War,
of its Mode of Fighting, &c, &c.
Translated from the Corrected Edi-
tion, by permission of the Author, by
Colonel Edward Newdigate. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price $s.
Ashantee War (The).
A Popular Narrative: By the
Special Correspondent of the "Daily
News." Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
ASHTON (J.).
Rough Notes of a Visit to
Belgium, Sedan, and Paris, in
September, i870-7i. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 3s. 6a.
Aunt Mary's Bran Pie.
By the author of "St. Olave's."
Illustrated. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
Aurora.
A Volume of Verse. Fcap. 8vo.
Cloth, price 5s.
AYRTON (J. C).
A Scotch Wooing. 2 vols.
Crown 8vo. Cloth.
BAGEHOT (Walter).
Physics and Politics; or,
Thoughts on the Application of the
Principles of "Natural Selection"
and "Inheritance" to Political So-
ciety. Third Edition. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 4s.
Volume II. of The International
Scientific Series.
The English Constitution.
A New Edition, Revised and
Corrected, with an Introductory
Dissertation on Recent Changes and
Events. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
js. 6d.
Lombard Street. A
Description of the Money Market.
Sixth Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price js. 6d.
BAIN (Alexander), LL.D.
MindandBody: the Theories
of their relation. Fifth Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 4$.
Volume IV. of The International
Scientific Series.
BALDWIN (Capt. J. H.), F.Z.S.,
Bengal Stan Corps.
The Large and Small Game
of Bengal and the North-West-
ern Provinces of India. 4to. With
numerous Illustrations. Cloth, price
2i s.
BANKS (Mrs. G. L.).
God's Providence House.
New Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3s. 6d.
BARING (T. C), M.A., M.P.
Pindar in English Rhyme.
Being an Attempt to render the
Epinikian Odes with the principal
remaining Fragments of Pindar into
English Rhymed Verse. Small
Quarto. Cloth, price js.
BARLEE (Ellen).
Locked Out: a Tale of the
Strike. With a Frontispiece. Royal
i6mo. Cloth, price is. 6d.
BAUR (Ferdinand), Dr. Ph.,
Professor in Maulbronn.
A Philological Introduction
to Greek and Latin for Students.
Translated and adapted from the
German of. By C. Kegan Paul,
M.A. Oxon., and the Rev. E. D.
Stone, M.A., late Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge, and Assistant
Master at Eton. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 6s.


Henry S, King & Co.'s Publications.
3
BAYNES (Rev. Canon R. HA
M.A.
Home Songs for Quiet
Hours. Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo.
Cloth extra, price 3s. 6d.
This may also be had handsomely
bound in Morocco with gilt edges.
BECKER (Bernard H.).
The Scientific Societies of
London. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5*.
BENNETT (Dr. W. C).
Baby May. Home Poems
and Ballads. With Frontispiece.
Crown 8vo. Cloth elegant, price 6s.
Baby May and Home
Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Sewed in
Coloured Wrapper, price is.
Narrative Poems & Ballads.
Fcap. 8vo. Sewed in Coloured Wrap-
per, price is.
SongsforSailors. Dedicated
by Special Request to H. R. H. the
Duke of Edinburgh. With Steel
Portrait and Illustrations. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
An Edition in Illustrated Paper
Covers, price is.
Songs of a Song Writer.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
BENNIE(Rev.J. N.), M.A.
The Eternal Life. Sermons
preached during the last twelve years.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
BERNARD (Bayle).
Samuel Lover, the Life and
Unpublished Works of. In 2
vols. With a Steel Portrait. Post
8vo. Cloth, price 2is.
BERNSTEIN (Prof.).
The Five Senses of Man.
With 9i Illustrations. Second
Edition, Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
Volume XXI. of The International
Scientific Series.
BETHAM - EDWARDS (Miss
M.).
Kitty. With a Frontispiece.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
Mademoiselle Josephine's
Fridays, and Other Stories.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price js. 6d.
BISCOE (A. C.)-
The Earls of Middleton,
Lords of Clermont and of Fetter-
cairn, and the Middleton Family.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price io*. 6d.
BISSET (A.)
History of the Struggle for
Parliamentary Government in
England. 2 vols. Demy 8vo.
Cloth, price 24s.
BLANC (H.), M.D.
Cholera: How to Avoid and
Treat it. Popular and Practical
Notes. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
4s. 6d.
BLASERNA (Prof. Pietro).
The Theory of Sound in its
Relation to Music. With numer-
ous Illustrations. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
Volume XXII. of The International
Scientific Series.
BLUME (Major.W.).
The Operations of the
German Armies in France, from
Sedan to the end of the war of i870-
7i. With Map. From the Journals
of the Head-quarters Staff. Trans-
lated by the late E. M. Jones, Maj.
20th Foot, Prof, of Mil. Hist., Sand-
hurst. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price gs.
BOGUSLAWSKI (Capt. A. von).
Tactical Deductions from
the War of i870-71. Translated
by Colonel Sir Lumley Graham,
Bart., late i8th (Royal Irish) Regi-
ment. Third Edition, Revised and
Corrected. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price
7.r.
BONWICK(J.), F.R.G.S.
The Tasmanian Lily. With
Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5f.
Mike Howe,the Bushranger
of Van Diemen's Land. With
Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.


4
A List of
BOSWELL (R. B.), M.A., Oxon.
Metrical Translations from
the Greek and Latin Poets, and
other Poems. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
BOTHMER (Countess von).
Cruel as the Grave. A
Novel. 3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
BOWEN (H. C), M.A., Head
Master of the Grocers' Company's
Middle Class School at Hackney.
Studies in English, for the
use of Modern Schools. Small Crown
8vo. Cloth, price i$. 6d.
BOWRING (L.), C.S.I.
Eastern Experiences.
Illustrated with Maps and Diagrams.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price i6s.
BRADLEY (F. H.).
Ethical Studies. Critical
Essays in Moral Philosophy. Large
post 8vo. Cloth, price gs.
Brave Men's Footsteps.
By the Editor of "Men who have
Risen." A Book of Example and
Anecdote for Young People. With
Four Illustrations by C. Doyle.
Third Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3s. 6d.
BRIALMONTfCol. A.).
Hasty Intrenchments.
Translated by Lieut. Charles A.
Empson, R. A. With Nine Plates.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
Briefs and Papers. Being
Sketches of the Bar and the Press.
By Two Idle Apprentices. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
js. 6d,
BROOKE (Rev. J. M. S.), M. A.
Heart, be Still. A Sermon
preached in Holy Trinity Church,
Southall, Imperial 3amo. Sewed,
price 6d.
BROOKE (Rev. S. A.), M. A.,
Chaplain in Ordinary to Her Majesty
the Queen, and Minister of Bedford
Chapel, Bloomsbury.
The Late Rev. F. W. Ro-
bertson, M.A., Life and Letters
of. Edited by.
I. Uniform with the Sermons.
2 vols. With Steel Portrait. Price
js. 6d.
II. Library Edition. 8vo. With
Two Steel Portraits. Price i2s.
III. A Popular Edition, in i vol.
8vo. Price 6s.
Theology in the English
Poets. — Cowper, Coleridge,
Wordsworth, and Burns. Third
Edition. Post 8vo. Cloth, price gs.
Christ in Modern Life.
Ninth Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price js. 6d.
Sermons. First Series. Ninth
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s..
Sermons. Second Series.
Third Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 7s.
Frederick DenisonMaurice:
The Life and Work of. A Memorial
Sermon. Crown 8vo. Sewed, price is.
BROOKE (W. G.), M. A.
The Public Worship
Regulation Act. With a Classified
Statement of its Provisions, Notes,
and Index. Third Edition, revised
and corrected. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3$. 6d.
Six Privy Council Judg-
ments— i850-i872. Annotated by.
Third Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price gs.
BROUN (J. A.).
Magnetic Observations at
Trevandrum and Augustia
Malley. Vol. I. 4to. Cloth,
price 63s.
The Report from above, separately
sewed, price six.


Henry S. King &> Coh Publications.
5
BROWN (Rev. J. Baldwin), B.A.
The Higher Life. Its Reality,
Experience, and Destiny. Fourth
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
7s. 6d,
Doctrine of Annihilation
in the Light of the Gospel
of Love. Five Discourses. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
2s. 6d.
BROWN 0- Croumbie), LL.D.
Reboisement in France; or,
Records of the Replanting of the
Alps, the Cevennes, and the Pyre-
nees with Trees, Herbage, and Bush.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price i2s. 6d.
The Hydrology of Southern
Africa. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price
i0s. 6d.
BROWNE (Rev. M. E.)
Until the Day Dawn. Four
Advent Lectures. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 2s. 6d.
BRYANT (W. C.)
Poems. Red-line Edition.
With 24 Illustrations and Portrait of
the Author. Crown 8vo. Cloth extra,
price js. 6d.
A Cheaper Edition, with Frontis-
piece. Small crown 8vo. Cloth, price
3*. 6d,
BUCHANAN (Robert).
Poetical Works. Collected
Edition, in 3 vols., with Portrait.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s. each.
Master-Spirits. Post 8vo.
Cloth, price i0s. 6d.
BULKELEY (Rev. H. J.).
Walled in, and other Poems.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
BUNNETT (F. E.).
Linked at Last. Crown 8vo.
Cloth.
BURTON (Mrs. Richard).
The Inner Life of Syria,
Palestine, and the Holy Land.
With Maps, Photographs, and
Coloured Plates. 2 vols. Second
Edition. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price
24s.
CADELL (Mrs. H. M.).
Ida Craven: A Novel. £
vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
CALDERON.
Calderon's Dramas: The
Wonder-Working Magician,—Life is
a Dream—The Purgatory of St.
Patrick. Translated by Denis
Florence MacCarthy. Post 8vo.
Cloth, price ioj.
CARLISLE (A. D.), B. A.
Round the World in 1870.
A Volume of Travels, with Maps.
New and Cheaper Edition. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
CARNE (Miss E. T.).
The Realm of Truth. Crown
8vo." Cloth, price 5s. 6d.
CARPENTER (E.).
Narcissus and other
Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price
CARPENTER (W. B.), LL.D.,
M.D., F.R.S., &c.
The Principles of Mental
Physiology. With their Applica-
tions to the Training and Discipline
of the Mind, and the Study of its
Morbid Conditions. Illustrated.
Fourth Edition. 8vo. Cloth, price
i2s.
CARR (Lisle).
Judith Gwynne. 3 vols.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
CHRISTOPHERSON (The late
Rev. Henry), M.A.
Sermons. With an Intro-
duction by John Rae, LL.D., F.S.A.
First Series. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price js. 6d.
Sermons. With an Intro-
duction by John Rae, LL.D., F.S.A.
Second Series. Crown 8vo. Cloth
price 6s.


6
A List of
CLAYTON (Cecil).
Effie's Game; How She
Lost and How She Won. A
Novel. 2 vols. Cloth.
CLERK (Mrs. Godfrey).
'Ilam en Nas. Historical
Tales and Anecdotes of the Times
of the Early Khalifahs. Translated
from the Arabic Originals. Illus-
trated with Historical and Explana-
tory Notes. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
js.
CLERY (C.), Capt.
Minor Tactics. With 26
Maps and Plans. Third and revised
Edition. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price i6s.
CLODD (Edward), F.R.A.S.
The Childhood of the
World: a Simple Account of Man
in Early Times. Third Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3s.
A Special Edition for Schools,
Price is.
The Childhood of Reli-
gions. Including a Simple Account
of the Birth and Growth of Myths
and Legends. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
COLERIDGE (Sara).
Pretty Lessons in Verse
for Good Children, with some
Lessons in Latin, in Easy Rhyme.
A New Edition. Illustrated. Fcap.
8vo. Cloth, price ^s. 6d.
Phantasmion. A Fairy Tale.
With an Introductory Preface by the
Right Hon. Lord Coleridge, of
Ottery St. Mary. A New Edition.
Illustrated. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 7s. 6d.
Memoir and Letters of Sara
Coleridge. EditedbyherDaughter.
With Index. 2 vols. With Two
Portraits. Third Edition, Revised
and Corrected. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 24s.
Cheap Edition. With one Portrait.
Cloth, price 7$. 6d
COLLINS (Mortimer).
The Princess Clarice. A
Story of i87i. 2 vols. Cloth.
Squire Silchester's Whim.
3 vols. Cloth.
Miranda. A Midsummer
Madness. 3 vols. Cloth.
Inn of Strange Meetings,
and other Poems. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 5s.
The Secret of Long Life.
Dedicated by special permission to
Lord St. Leonards. Fourth Edition.
Large crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
COLLINS (Rev. R.), M.A.
Missionary Enterprise in
the East. With special reference
to the Syrian Christians of Malabar,
and the results of modern Missions.
With Four Illustrations. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
CONGREVE (Richard), M.A.,
M.R.C.P.L.
Human Catholicism. Two
Sermons delivered at the Positivist
School on the Festival of Humanity,
87 and 88, January x, i875 and i876.
Demy 8vo. Sewed, price is.
CONWAY (Moncure D.).
Republican Superstitions.
Illustrated by the Political History
of the United States. Including a
Correspondence with M, Louis Blanc.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
CONYERS (Ansley).
Chesterleigh. 3 vols. Crown
8vo. Cloth.
COOKE (M. C), M.A., LL.D.
Fungi; their Nature, Influ-
ences, Uses, &c. Edited by the Rev.
M. J. Berkeley, M.A., F. L. S.
With Illustrations. Second Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
Volume XIV. of The International
Scientific Series.


Henry S. King &
Co.'s Publications.
7
COOKE (Prof. J. P.), of the Har-
vard University.
The New Chemistry. With
3i Illustrations. Third Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
Volume IX. of The International
Scientific Series.
Scientific Culture. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price is.
COOPER (T. T.), F.R.G.S.
The Mishmee Hills: an
Account of a Journey made in an
Attempt to Penetrate Thibet from
Assam, to open New Routes for
Commerce. Second Edition. With
Four Illustrations and Map. Post
8vo. Cloth, price i0s. 6d.
Cornhill Library of Fiction
(The). Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
3$. 6d. per volume.
Half-a-Dozen Daughters. By
J. Masterman.
The House of Raby. By Mrs. G.
Hooper.
A Fight for Life. By Moy
Thomas.
Robin Gray. By Charles Gibbon.
Kitty. By Miss M. Betham-
Edwards.
One of Two; or, The Left-
Handed Bride. By J. Hain Fris-
well.
Ready - Money Mortiboy. A
Matter-of-Fact Story.
God's Providence House. By
Mrs. G. L. Banks.
For Lack of Gold. By Charles
Gibbon.
Abel Drake's Wife. By John
Saunders.
Hirell. By John Saunders.
CORY (Lieut. Col. Arthur).
The Eastern Menace; or,
Shadows of Coming Events.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
Cosmos.
A Poem. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price
3s. 6d.
COTTON (R. T.).
Mr. Carington. A Tale of
Love and Conspiracy, 3 vols. Crown
8yo. Cloth.
CRESSWELL (Mrs. G.).
The King's Banner. Drama
in Four Acts. Five Illustrations.
4to. Cloth, price ioj. 6d,
CROMPTON (Henry).
Industrial Conciliation.
Fcap, 8vo. Cloth, price 2s. 6d,
CUMMINS (H. I.), M. A.
Parochial Charities of the
City of London. Sewed, price is.
CURWEN (Henry).
Sorrow and Song: Studies
of Literary Struggle. Henry Miirger
—Novalis—Alexander Petofi—Hon-
ore de Balzac — Edgar Allan Poe
—Andre* Chenier. 2 vols. Crown
8tfo. Cloth, price i5s.
DANCE (Rev. C. D.).
Recollections of Four Years
in Venezuela. With Three Illus-
trations and a Map. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price js. 6d.
D'ANVERS (N. R.).
The Suez Canal: Letters
and Documents descriptive of its
Rise and Progress in i854-56. By
Ferdinand de Lesseps. Translated
by. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price i0s. 6d.
Little Minnie's Troubles.
An E very-day Chronicle. With Four
Illustrations by W. H. Hughes.
Fcap. Cloth, price 3f. 6d.
DAVIDSON(Rev. Samuel), D.D.,
LL.D.
The NewTestament,trans-
lated from the Latest Greek
Text of Tischendorf. A new and
thoroughly revised Edition. Post
8vo. Cloth, price i0s. 6d.
Canon of the Bible: Its
Formation, History, and Fluctua-
tions. Small crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.


8
A List of
DAVIES (G. Christopher).
Mountain, Meadow, and
Mere: a Series of Outdoor Sketches
of Sport, Scenery, Adventures, and
Natural History. With Sixteen Il-
lustrations by Bosworth W. Har-
court. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
Rambles and Adventures
of Our School Field Club. With
Four Illustrations. Crown 8vo.'
Cloth, price 5s.
DAVIES (Rev. J. L.), M.A.
Theology and Morality.
Essays on Questions of Belief and
Practice. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
7$. 6d.
DE KERKADEC (Vicomtesse
'.Solange).
A Chequered Life, being
Memoirs of the Vicomtesse de Leo-
ville Meilhan. Edited by. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price js. 6d.
PE L'HOSTE (Col. E. P.).
The Desert Pastor, Jean
Jarousseau. Translated from the
French of Eugene Pelletan. With a
Frontispiece. New Edition. Fcap.
8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
DE REDCLIFFE (Viscount
Stratford), P.C., K.G., G.C.B.
Why am I a Christian?
Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3$.
DE TOCQUEVILLE (A.).
Correspondence and Con-
versations of, with Nassau Wil-
liam Senior, from I834 to i859.
Edited by M. C. M. Simpson. 2
vols. Post 8vo. Cloth, price 2 i$.
DE VERE (Aubrey).
Alexander the Great. A
Dramatic Poem. Small crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5$.
The Infant Bridal, and
Other Poems. A New and En-
larged Edition. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price js. 6d.
DE VERE (Aubrey)— continued:
The Legends of St. Patrick,
and Other Poems. Small crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
St. Thomas of Canterbury.
A Dramatic Poem. Large fcap. 8vo.
Cloth, price 5s.
DE WILLE (E.).
Under a Cloud; or, Johan-
nes Olaf. A Novel. Translated by
F. E. Bunnett. 3 vols. Crown 8vo.
Cloth.
DENNIS (J.).
English Sonnets. Collected
and Arranged. Elegantly bound.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
DOBSON (Austin).
Vignettes in Rhyme and
Vers de Societe. Third Edition.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
DONN]£(A.), M.D.
Change of Air and Scene.
A Physician's Hints about Doctors,
Patients, Hygiene, and Society;
with Notes of Excursions for Health.
Second Edition. Large post 8vo.
Cloth, price 9s.
DOWDEN (Edward), LL.D.
Shakspere: a Critical Study
of his Mind and Art. Second Edition.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price i2s.
Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 5$.
DOWNTON (Rev. H.), M.A.
Hymns and Verses. Ori-
ginal and Translated. Small crown
8vo. Cloth, price 3$. 6d.
DRAPER (J. W.), M.D., LL.D.,
Professor in the University of New
York.
History of the Conflict be-
tween Religion and Science.
Seventh Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
Volume XIII. of The International
Scientific Series.


Henry S. King 6° Co.'s Publications.
9
DREW (Rev. G. S.), M.A.
Scripture Lands in con-
nection with their History.
Second Edition. 8vo. Cloth, price
i os. &/.
Nazareth: Its Life and
Lessons. Third Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
The Divine Kingdom on
Earth as it is ,in Heaven. 8vo.
Cloth, price i0s. 6d.
The Son of Man: His Life
and Ministry. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 7$. 6d.
DREWRY (G. O.), M.D.
The Common- Sense
Management of the Stomach.
Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 2s. 6d.
DREWRY (G. O.), M.D., and
BARTLETT (H. C), Ph.D.,
F.C.S.
Cup and Platter: or, Notes
on Food and its Effects. Small 8vo.
Cloth, price 2s. 6d.
DRUMMOND (Miss).
Tripps Buildings. A Study
from Life, with Frontispiece. Small
crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6ci.
DURAND (Lady).
Imitations from the Ger-
man of Spitta and Terstegen.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 4s.
DU VERNOIS (Col. von Verdy).
Studies in leading Troops.
An authorized and accurate Trans-
lation by Lieutenant H. T. T.
Hildyard, 7ist Foot. Parts I. and
II. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 7s.
EDEN (Frederick).
The Nile without a
Dragoman. Second Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 7s. 6d.
EDWARDS (Rev. Basil).
Minor Chords; Or, Songs
for the Suffering: a Volume of
Verse. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price
3s. 6d. ; paper, price 2s. 6d.
EILOART (Mrs.).
Lady Moretoun's Daughter.
3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
ELLIOTT (Ebenezer), The Corn
Law Rhymer.
Poems. Edited by his son,
the Rev. Edwin Elliott, of St. John's,
Antigua. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price i8s.
ENGLISH CLERGYMAN.
An Essay on the Rule of
Faith and Creed of Athanasius.
Shall the Rubric preceding the
Creed be removed from the Prayer-
book? Sewed. 8vo. Price is.
Epic of Hades (The).
By a New Writer. Author of
"Songs of Two Worlds." Fcap. 8vo
Cloth, price 5s.
Eros Agonistes.
Poems. By E. B. D. Fcap. 8vo.
Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
Essays on the Endowment
of Research.
By Various Writers.
List of Contributors.
Mark Pattison, B. D.
James S. Cotton, B. A.
Charles E. Appleton, D. C. L.
Archibald H. Sayce, M. A.
Henry Clifton Sorby, F. R. S.
Thomas K. Cheyne, M. A.
W. T. Thiselton Dyer, M. A.
Henry Nettleship, M. A.
Square crown octavo. Cloth,
price i0s. 6d.
EVANS (Mark).
The Story of our Father's
Love, told to Children; being a
New and Enlarged Edition of
Theology for Children. With Four
Illustrations. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 3s. 6d.-
A Book of Common Prayer
and Worship for Household
Use, compiled exclusively from the
Holy Scriptures. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 2j. 6d.
EYRE (Maj.-Gen. Sir V.), C.B.,
K.C.S.I., &c.
Lays of a Knight-Errant
in many Lands. Square crown
8vo. With Six Illustrations. Cloth,
price 7ff. 6d.


10
A List of
FAITHFULL (Mrs. Francis G.).
Love Me, or Love Me Not.
3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
FARQUHARSON (M.).
I. Elsie Dinsmore. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 3$. 6d.
II. Elsie's Girlhood. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
III. Elsie's Holidays at
Roselands. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
FAVRE (Mons. J.).
The Government of the
National Defence. From the 30th
June to the 3ist October, i870.
Translated by H. Clark. Demy 8vo.
Cloth, price icw. 6d.
FERRIS (Henry Weybridge).
Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
FISHER (Alice).
His Queen. 3 vols. Crown
8vo. Cloth.
FOOTMAN (Rev. H.), M.A.
From Home and Back; or,
Some Aspects of Sin as seen in the
Light of the Parable of the Prodigal.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
FORBES (A.).
Soldiering and Scribbling.
A Series of Sketches. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 7$. 6d.
FOTHERGILL (Jessie).
Aldyth: A Novel. 2 vols.
Crown 8vo. Cloth.
Healey. A Romance. 3 vols.
Crown 8vo. Cloth.
FOWLE (Rev. T. W.), MlA.
The Reconciliation of Re-
ligion and Science. Being Essays
on Immortality, Inspiration, Mira-
cles, and the Being of Christ. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price i0s. 6d.
FOX-BOURNE (H. R.).
The Life of John Locke,
i632—i704. 2 vols. Demy 8vo.
Cloth, price 2%s.
FRASER (Donald).
Exchange Tables of Stea-
ling and Indian Rupee Curren-
cy, upon a new and extended system,
embracing Values from One Far-
thing to One Hundred Thousand
Pounds, and at Rates progressing, in
Sixteenths of a Penny, from is. gd. to
as. ^d- P*r Rupee. Royal Svo.
Cloth, price ioj. 6d.
FRERE(Sir H. Bartle E.), G.C. B.,
G. C.S.I.
The Threatened Famine in
Bengal: How it may be Met, and
the Recurrence of Famines in India
Prevented. Being No. i of " Occa-
sional Notes on Indian Affairs."
With 3 Maps. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
FRISWELL (J. Hain).
The Better Self. Essays for
Home Life. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 6s.
One of Two; or, The Left-
Handed Bride. With a Frontis-
piece. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
3$. 6d.
GARDNER (H.).
Sunflowers. A Book of
Verses. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
GARDNER (J.), M.D.
Longevity: The Means of
Prolonging Life after Middle
Age. Third Edition, revised arid
enlarged. Small crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 4s,
GARRETT (E.).
By StHl Waters. A Story
for Quiet Hours. With Seven Illus-
trations. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
GIBBON (Charles).
For Lack of Gold. With a
Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3s. 6d.
Robin Gray. "With a Frontis-
piece. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
3s. 6d.


Henry S. King 6° Go's Publications. n
GILBERT (Mrs.).
Autobiography and other
Memorials. Edited by Josiah
Gilbert. Second Edition. In 2 vols.
With 2 Stee! Portraits and several
Wood Engravings. Post 8vo. Cloth,
price 24s.
GILL (Rev. W. W.), B.A.
Myths and Songs from the
South Pacific. With a Preface by
F. Max M filler, M.A., Professor of
Comparative Philology at Oxford.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price gs.
GODKIN (James).
The Religious History of
Ireland: Primitive, Papa!, and
Protestant. Including the Evange-
lical Missions, Catholic Agitations,
and Church Progress of the last half
Century. 8vo. Cloth, price i2s.
GODWIN (William).
William Godwin: His
Friends and Contemporaries.
With Portraits and Facsimiles of the
handwriting of Godwin and his Wife.
By C. Kegan Paul. 2 vols. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price 28s.
The Genius of Christianity
U nveiled. Being Essays never
before published. Edited, with a
Preface, by C. Kegan Paul. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 7s. 6d.
GOETZE (Capt. A. von).
Operations of the German
Engineers during the War of
i870-i87i. Published by Authority,
and in accordance with Official Docu-
ments. Translated from the German
by Colonel G. Graham, V.C., C.B.,
R.E. With 6 large Maps. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price 2is.
GOODENOUGH (Commodore J.
G.), R.N., C.B., C.M.G.
Journals of, during his Last
Command as Senior Officer on the
Australian Station, i873-i875. Edited,
with a Memoir, by his Widow. With
Maps, Woodcuts, and Steel En-
graved Portrait. Square post 8vo.
Cloth, price i4$.
GOODMAN (W.).
Cuba, the Pearl of the
Antilles. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
js. 6d.
GOULD (Rev. S. Baring), M.A.
The Vicar of Morwenstow:
a Memoir of the Rev. R. S. Hawker.
With Portrait. Third Edition, re-
vised. Square post 8vo. Cloth, xos. 6d.
GRANVILLE (A. B.), M.D.,
F.R.S..&C.
Autobiography of A. B.
Granville, F. R. S., .etc. Edited,
with a brief account of the concluding
years of his life, by his youngest
Daughter, Paulina B. Granville. 2
vols. With a Portrait. Second Edi-
tion. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 32s.
GRAY (Mrs. Russell).
Lisette's Venture. A Novel.
2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
GREEN (T. Bowden).
Fragments of Thought.
Dedicated by permission to the Poet
Laureate. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
js. 6d.
GREENWOOD (J.), "The Ama-
teur Casual."
In Strange Company; or,
The Note Book of a Roving Corre-
spondent. Second Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
GREY (John), of Dilston.
John Grey (of Dilston):
Memoirs. By Josephine E. Butler.
New and Revised Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
GRIFFITH (Rev. T.), A.M.
Studies of the Divine Mas-
ter. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price i2s.
GRIFFITHS (Capt. Arthur).
Memorials of Millbank,and
Chapters in Prison History.
With Illustrations by R. Goff and
the Author. 2 vols. Post 8vo. Cloth,
price 2i s.
The Queen's Shilling. A -
Novel. 2 vols. Cloth.


12
A List of
GRIMLEY (Rev. H. N.), M.A.,
Professor of Mathematics in the
University College of Wales, and
Chaplain of Tremadoc Church.
Tremadoc Sermons, chiefly
on the Spiritual Body, the Unseen
World, and the Divine Humanity.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 7s. 6d.
GRUNER(M. L).
Studies of Blast Furnace
Phenomena. Translated by L. D.
B. Gordon, F.R.S.E., F.G.S. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price js. 6d.
GURNEY(Rev. A. T.).
Words of Faith and Cheer.
A Mission of Instruction and Sugges-
tion. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
First Principles in Church
and State. Demy 8vo. Sewed,
price is. 6d.
HAECKEL (Prof. Ernst).
The History of Creation.
Translation revised by Professor E.
Ray Lankester, M.A., F.R.S. With
Coloured Plates and Genealogical
Trees of the various groups of both
plants and animals. 2 vols. Second
Edition. Post 8vo. Cloth, price 32s.
HARCOURT (Capt. A. F. P.).
The Shakespeare Argosy.
Containing much of the wealth of
Shakespeare's Wisdom and Wit,
alphabetically arranged and classi-
fied. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
HAWEIS (Rev. H. R.), M.A.
Current Coin. Materialism—
The Devil—Crime—Drunkenness—
Pauperism—Emotion—Recreation—
The Sabbath. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 6s.
Speech in Season. Third
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
gs.
Thoughts for the Times.
Ninth Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price js. 6d.
Unsectarian Family
Prayers, for Morning and Evening
for a Week, with short selected
passages from the Bible. Square
crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
HAWTHORNE (Julian).
Bressant. A Romance. 2
vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
Idolatry. A Romance. 2vols.
Crown 8vo. Cloth.
HAWTHORNE (Nathaniel).
Nathaniel Hawthorne. A
Memoir with Stories, now first pub-
lished in this country. ByH. A. Page.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price js. 6d.-
Septimius. A Romance.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 9s.
HAYMAN (H.), D.D.,late Head
Master of Rugby School.
Rugby School Sermons.
With an Introductory Essay on the
Indwelling of the Holy Spirit.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price js. 6a.
Heathergate.
A Story of Scottish Life and Cha-
racter. By a New Author. 2 vols.
Crown 8vo. Cloth.
HELLWALD (Baron F. von).
The Russians in Central
Asia. A Critical Examination,
down to the present time, of the
Geography and History- of Central
Asia. Translated by Lieut. -Col.
Theodore Wirgman, LL.B. Large
post 8vd. With Map. Cloth,
price i2s.
HELVIG (Capt. H.).
The Operations of the Ba-
varian Army Corps. Translated
by Captain G. S. Schwabe. With
Five large Maps. In 2 vols. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price 24s.
HINTON (James).
The Place of the Physician.
To which is added Essays on the
Law of Human Life, and on the
Relation between Organic and
Inorganic Worlds. Second Edi-
tion. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
Physiology for Practical
Use. By various Writers. With
50 Illustrations. 2 vols. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
i2s. 6d.


Henry S. King 6° Co's Publications. i3
HINTON (JAtncay-continned:
An Atlas of Diseases of the
Membrana Tympani. With Des-
criptive Text. Post8vo. Price £6 6s.
The Questions of Aural
Surgery. With Illustrations. 2 vols.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price i2s. 6d.
H. J. C.
The Art of Furnishing.
A Popular Treatise on the Principles
of Furnishing, based on the Laws of
Common Sense, Requirement, and
Picturesque Effect. Small crown
8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
HOCKLEY (W. B.).
Tales of the Zenana; or,
A Nuwab's Leisure Hours. By the
Authorof " Pandurang Hart." With
a Preface by Lord Stanley of Alder-
ley. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 2i f.
Pandurang Hari; or, Me-
moirs of a Hindoo. A Tale of
Mahratta Life sixty years ago. With
a Preface by Sir H. Bartle E.
Frere, G.C.S.I., &c. 2 vols. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 2is.
HOFFBAUER (Capt).
The German Artillery in
the Battles near Metz. Based
on the official reports of the German
Artillery. Translated by Capt. E.
O. Hollist. With Map1 and Plans.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 2is.
Hogan, M.P.
A Novel. 3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
HOLMES (E. G. A.).
Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 5i.
HOLROYD (Major W. R. M.)
Tas-hil ul Kalam; or,
Hindustani made Easy. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5s.
HOPE (James L. A.).
In Quest of Coolies. With
Illustrations. Second Edition. Crown
8to. Cloth, price 6s.
HOOPER (Mary).
Little Dinners: How to
Serve them with Elegance and
Economy. Eleventh Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
Cookery for Invalids, Per-
sons of Delicate Digestion, and
Children. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
3s. 6d.
HOOPER (Mrs. G.).
The House of Raby. With
a Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3*. 6d.
HOPKINS (M.).
The Port of Refuge; or,
Counsel and Aid to Shipmasters in
Difficulty, Doubt, or Distress. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
HORNE (William), M.A.
Reason and Revelation:
an Examination into the Nature and
Contents of Scripture Revelation, as
compared with other Forms of Truth.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price i2s.
HOWARD (Mary M.).
Beatrice Aylmer, and other
Tales. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
HOWARD (Rev. G. B.).
- An Old Legend of St.
Paul's. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price
4-f. 6d.
HOWELL (James).
A Tale of the Sea, Son-
nets, and other Poems. Fcap.
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
HUGHES (Allison).
Penelope and other Poems.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 4s. 6d.
HULL (Edmund C. P.).
The European in India.
With a Medical Guide for Anglo-
Indians. By R. R. S. Mair, M.D.,
F.R.C.S.E. Second Edition, Revised
and Corrected. Post 8vo. Cloth,
price 6s.


i4
A List of
HUMPHREY (Rev. W.).
Mr. Fitzjames Stephen and
Cardinal Bellarmine. DemySvo.
Sewed, price is.
HUTTON (James).
Missionary Life in the
Southern Seas. With Illustrations.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 7s. 6d.
IGNOTUS.
Culmshire Folk. A Novel.
New and Cheaper Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
INCHBOLD (J. W.).
Annus Amoris. Sonnets.
Foolscap 8vo. Cloth, price 4s. 6d.
INGELOW (Jean).
The Little Wonder-horn.
A Second Series of '* Stories Told to
a Child." With Fifteen Illustrations.
Square 24ni0. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
Off the Skelligs. (Her First
Romance.) 4 vols. Crown 8vo.
Cloth.
International Scientific
Series (The).
I. The Forms of Water in
Clouds and Rivers, Ice and
Glaciers. By J. Tyndall, LL.D.,
F. R. S. With 25 Illustrations. Sixth
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
II. Physics and Politics; or,
Thoughts on the Application of the
Principles of " Natural Selection"
and "Inheritance" to Political So-
ciety. By Walter Bagehot. Third
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 4s.
III. Foods. By Edward Smith,
M.D., LL.B., F.R.S. With nu-
merous Illustrations. Fourth Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
IV. Mind and Body: The Theo-
ries of their Relation. By Alexander
Bain, LL.D. With Four Illustra-
tions. Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 4s.
V. The Study of Sociology.
By Herbert Spencer. Sixth Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
VI. On the Conservation of
Energy. By Balfour Stewart, M. A.,
LL. D., F. R. S. With i4 Illustrations.
Third Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
International Scientific
Series (The)—continued.
VII. Animal Locomotion; or.
Walking, Swimming, and Flying.
By J. B. Pettigrew, M.D., F.R.S.,
etc. With i30 Illustrations. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
VIII. Responsibility in Mental
Disease. By Henry Maudsley,
M.D. Second Edition. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5$.
IX. The New Chemistry. By
Professor J. P. Cooke, of the Har-
vard University. With 3i Illustra-
tions. Third Edition. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5s.
X. The Science of Law. By
Professor Sheldon Amos. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
XL Animal Mechanism. A
Treatise on Terrestrial and Aerial
Locomotion. By Professor E. J.
Marey. With ii7 Illustrations.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
XII. The Doctrine of Descent
and Darwinism. By Professor Os-
car Schmidt (Strasburg University).
With 26 Illustrations. 'Third Edi-
tion. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
XIII. The History of the Con-
flict between Religion and Sci-
ence. By J. W. Draper, M.D.,
LL.D. Eighth Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
XIV. Fungi; their Nature, In-
fluences, Uses, &c. By M. C.
Cooke, M.A., LL.D. Edited by
the Rev. M. J. Berkeley, M.A.,
F, L. S. With numerous Illustrations.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
XV. The Chemical Effects of
Light and Photography. By Dr.
Hermann Vogel (Polytechnic Aca-
demy of Berlin). Translation tho-
roughly revised. With i00 Illustra-
tions. Third Edition. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5s.
XVI. The Life and Growth of
Language. By William Dwight
Whitney, Professor of Sanskrit and
Comparative Philology in Yale^ Col-
lege, New Haven. Second Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.


Henry S. King &>
Co.'s Publications, 15
International Scientific
Series (The)—continued,
XVII. Money and the Mecha-
nism of Exchange. By W. Stan-
ley Jevons, M.A., F.R.S. Third
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
XVIII. The Nature of Light:
With a General Account of Physical
Optics. By Dr. Eugene Lommel,
Professor of Physics m the Univer-
sity of Erlangen. With i88 Illustra-
tions and a table of Spectra in Chro-
- mo-lithography. Second Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
XIX. Animal Parasites and
Messmates. By Monsieur Van
Beneden, Professor of the University
of Louvain, Correspondent of the
Institute of France. With 83 Illus-
trations. Second Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
XX. Fermentation. By Professor
Schiitzenberger, Director of the
Chemical Laboratory at the Sor-
bonne. With 28 Illustrations. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
XXI. The Five Senses of Man.
By Professor Bernstein, of the Uni-
versity of Halle. With 9i Illustra-
tions. Second Edition. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5s.
XXII. The Theory of Sound in
its Relation to Music. By Pro-
fessor Pietro Blaserna, of the Royal
University of Rome. With numerous
Illustrations. Second Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
Forthcoming Volumes.
Prof. W. Kingdon Clifford, M.A.
The First Principles of the Exact
Sciences explained to the Non-ma-
thematical.
Prof. T. H. Huxley,LL.D., F.R.S.
Bodily Motion and Consciousness.
Dr. W. B. Cari-enter, LL.D.,
F.R.S. The Physical Geography of
the Sea.
W. Lauder Lindsay, M.D.,
F. R. S. E. Mind in the Lower
Animals.
Sir John Lubbock, Bart., F.R.S.
On Ants and Bees.
Prof. W. T. Thiselton Dyer, B.A.,
B. Sc. Form and Habit in Flowering
Plants.
International Scientific
Series (The)—continued.
Mr. J. N. Lockyer, F.R.S. Spec-
trum Analysis.
Prof. Michael Foster, M.D. Pro-
toplasm and the Cell Theory.
H. Charlton Bastian, M. D.,
F.R.S. The Brain as an Organ of
Mind.
Prof. A. C Ramsay, LL.D., F.R.S.
Earth Sculpture" Hills, Valleys,
Mountains, Plains, Rivers, Lakes;
how they were Produced, and how
they have been Destroyed.
Prof. J. Rosenthal. General Phy-
siology of Muscles and Nerves.
P. Bert (Professor of Physiology,
Paris). Forms of Life and other
Cosmical Conditions.
Prof. Corfield, M.A., M.D.
(Oxon.) Air in its relation to Health.
JACKSON (T. G.).
Modern Gothic Architec-
ture. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
JACOB (Maj.-Gen. Sir G. Le
Grand), K.C.S.I., C.B.
Western India Before and
during the Mutinies. Pictures
drawn from life. Second Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price js. 6d.
JENKINS (E.) and RAYMOND
(JO. Esqs.
A Legal Handbook for
Architects, Builders, and Build-
ing Owners. Second Edition Re-
vised. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
JENKINS (Rev. R. C), M.A.
The Privilege of Peter and
the Claims of the Roman Church
confronted with the Scriptures, the
Councils,' and the Testimony of the
Popes themselves. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 3s. 6d.
JENNINGS (Mrs. Vaughan).
Rahel: Her Life and Let-
ters. With a Portrait from the
Painting by Daffinger. Square post
8vo. Cloth, price js. 6d.


i6
A List of
JEVONS (W. Stanley), M.A.,
F.R.S.
Money and the Mechanism
of Exchange. Second Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5$.
VolumeXV 11. of The International
Scientific Series.
KAUFMANN (Rev. M.), B.A.
Socialism: Its Nature, its
Dangers, and its Remedies con-
sidered. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
js. 6d.
KEATINGE (Mrs.).
Honor Blake: The Story of
a Plain Woman. 2 vols. Crown
8vo. Cloth.
KER (David).
On the Road to Khiva.
Illustrated with Photographs of the
Country and its Inhabitants, and a
copy of the Official Map in use
during the Campaign, from the Sur-
vey of Captain Leusilin. Post 8vo.
Cloth, price i2s.
The Boy Slave in Bokhara.
A Tale of Central Asia. With Illus-
trations. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
The Wild Horseman of
the Pampas. Illustrated. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
KING (Alice).
A Cluster of Lives. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price js. 6d.
KING (Mrs. Hamilton).
The Disciples. A New
Poem. Second Edition, with some
Notes. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
7s. 6d.
Aspromonte, and other
Poems. Second Edition. Fcap.
8vo. Cloth, price 4s, 6d.
KINGSFORD(Rev.F.W.),M.A.,
Vicar of St. Thomas's, Stamford Hill;
late Chaplain H. E. I. C. (Bengal
Presidency).
Hartham Conferences; or,
Discussions upon some of the Religi-
ous Topics of the Day. "Audi alte-
ram partem." Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3$. 6d.
KNIGHT (A. F. C).
Poems. Fcap 8vo. Cloth,
price 5$.
KINGSLEY (Charles).
Letters and Memories of
his Life. Edited by his Wife. 2
vols. Demy 8vo. With 2 Steel
engraved Portraits and numerous
Illustrations on Wood, and a
Facsimile of his Handwriting.
Cloth, price 36s.
LACORDAIRE (Rev. Pere).
Life: Conferences delivered
at Toulouse. A New and Cheaper
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
3$. 6d.
Lady of Lipari (The).
A Poem in Three Cantos. Fcap.
8vo. Cloth, price 5$.
LAURIE (J. S.).
Educational Course of
Secular School Books for India:
The First Hindustani
Reader. Stiff linen wrapper, price
6d. -
The Second Hindustani
Reader. Stiff linen wrapper, price
The Oriental (English)
Reader. Book I., price 6d.; II.,
price j\d.; III., price gd.; IV.,
price is.
Geography of India; with
Maps and Historical Appendix,
tracing the Growth of the British
Empire in Hindustan. Fcap. 8vo.
Cloth, price is. 6d.
LAYMANN (Capt.).
The Frontal Attack of
Infantry. Translated by Colonel
Edward Newdigate. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 2s. 6d.
L. D. S.
Letters from China and
Japan. With Illustrated Title-page.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 7s. 6d.
LEANDER (Richard).
Fantastic Stories. Trans-
lated from the German by Paulina
B. Granville. With Eight full-page
Illustrations by M. E. Fraser-Tytler.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
LEATHES (Rev. S.), M.A.
The Gospel Its Own Wit-
ness. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.


Henry_ S. King & Co.'s Publications.
17
LEE (Rev. F. G.), D.C.L.
The Other World; or,
Glimpses of the Supernatural. 2 vols.
A New Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price i5$.
LEE (Holme).
Her Title of Honour. A
Book for Girls. New Edition. With
a Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5j.
LENOIR (J.).
Fayoum; or, Artists in Egypt.
A Tour with M. Gcrome and others.
With i3 Illustrations. A New and
Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3$. 6d.
Leonora Christina, Memoirs
of, Daughter of Christian IV. of
Denmark. Written during her Im-
prisonment in the Blue Tower of the
Royal Palace at Copenhagen, i663-
i685. Translated by F. E. Bunnett.
With an Autotype Portrait of the
Princess. A New and Cheaper
Edition. Medium 8vo. Cloth, price
5s.
LEWIS (Mary A.).
A Rat with Three Tales.
With Four Illustrations by Catherine
F. Frere. Cloth, price 5s.
LISTADO (J. T.).
Civil Service. A Novel.
2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
LOCKER (F.).
London Lyrics. A New and
Revised Edition, with Additions and
a Portrait of the Author. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, elegant, price 7$. 6d.
LOMMEL (Dr. E.).
The Nature of Light: With
a General Account of Physical Optics.
Second Edition. With i88 Illustra-
tions and a Table of Spectra in
Chromo-lithography. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5$.
Volume XVIII. of The Interna-
tional Scientific Series.
LORIMER (Peter), D.D.
John Knox and the Church
of England: His Work in her Pulpit,
and his Influence upon her Liturgy,
Articles, and Parties. Demy 8vo.
Cloth, price i2s.
LOTHIAN (Roxburghe).
Dante and Beatrice from
i282 to i290. A Romance. 2 vols.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price 24s.
LOVEL (Edward).
The Owl's Nest in the City:
A Story. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
LOVER (Samuel), R.H.A.
The Life of Samuel Lover,
R. H. A.; Artistic, Literary, and
Musical. With Selections from his
Unpublished Papers and Correspon-
dence. By Bayle Bernard. 2 vols.
With a Portrait. Post 8vo. Cloth,
price 2i j.
LOWER (M. A.), M.A., F.S.A.
Wayside Notes in Scandi-
navia. Being Notes of Travel in
the North of Europe. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price gs.
LUCAS (Alice).
Translations from the
Works of German Poets of the
i8th and igth Centuries. Fcap.
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
LYONS (R. T.), Surg.-Maj. Ben-
gal Army.
A Treatise on Relapsing
Fever. Post 8vo. Cloth, price js, 6d.
MACAULAY (J.), M.A., M.D.,
Edin.
The Truth about Ireland:
Tours of Observation in i872 and
i875. With Remarks on Irish Public
Questions. Being a Second Edition
of " Ireland in i872," with a New
and Supplementary Preface. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 3$. 6d.
MAC DONALD (G.).
Malcolm. A Novel. 3 vols.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
St. George and St. Michael.
3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
MACLACHLAN (A. N. C), M.A.
William Augustus, Duke
of Cumberland: being a Sketch of
his Military Life and Character,
chiefly as exhibited in the General
Orders of His Royal Highness,
I745_I747. With Illustrations. Post
8vo. Cloth, price i5s.


iS
A List of
MAC KENNA (S. J.)-
Plucky Fellows. A Book
for Hoys. With Six Illustrations.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3f. 6d.
At School with an Old
Dragoon. With Six Illustrations.
Second. Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
McCLINTOCK.
Sir Spangle and the Dingy
Hen. Illustrated. Imperial i6mo.
Cloth, price af. 6d.
MAIR (R. S.), M.D., F.R.C.S.E.
The Medical Guide for
Anglo-Indians. Being a Compen-
dium of Advice to Europeans in
India, relating to the Preservation
and Regulation of Health. With a
Supplement on the Management of
Children in India. Crown 8vo. Limp
cloth, price 3*. 6d.
MANNING (His Eminence Car-
dinal).
Essays on Religion and
Literature. By various Writers.
Third Series. Demy 8vo. Cloth,
price i0s. 6d.
MAREY (E. J.).
Animal Mechanics. A
Treatise on Terrestrial and Aerial
Locomotion. With ii7 Illustrations.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5*.
Volume XI. of The International
Scientific Series.
MARKEWITCH (B.).
The Neglected Question.
Translated from the Russian, by the
Princess Ourousoff, and dedicated by
Express Permission to Her Imperial
and Royal Highness Marie Alexan-
drovna, the Duchess of Edinburgh.
2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price i4s.
MARRIOTT (Maj.-Gen. W. F.),
C.S.I.
A Grammar of Political
Economy. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 6s.
MARSHALL (H.).
The Story of Sir Edward's
Wife. A Novel. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price i o*. 6(1.
MASTERMAN (J.).
Half-a-dozen Daughters.
With a Frontispiece". Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 6d*
MAUDSLEY (Dr. H.).
Responsibility in Mental
Disease. Second Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
Volume VIII. of The International
Scientific Series.
MAUGHAN (W. C).
The Alps of Arabia; or,
Travels through Egypt, Sinai, Ara-
bia, and the Holy Land. With Map.
Second Edition. Demy 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
MAURICE (C. E.).
Lives of English Popular
Leaders. No. x.—Stephen Lang-
ton. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price js.6d.
No. 2.—Tyler, Ball, and Old-
castle. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
js. 6d.
Mazzini (Joseph).
A Memoir. By E. A. V. Two
Photographic Portraits. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
MEDLEY (Lieut.-Col. J. G.),R-E.
An Autumn Tour in the
United States and Canada.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
MENZIES (Sutherland).
Memoirs of Distinguished
Women. 2 vols. Post 8vo. Cloth,
price ios. 6d.
MICKLETHWAITE (J. T.),
F.S.A.
Modern Parish Churches:
Their Plan, Design, and Furniture.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price js. 6d.
MILNE (James).
Tables of Exchange for the
Conversion of Sterling Money into
Indian and Ceylon Currency, at
Rates from is. 8rf. to 2.r. 3^. per
Rupee. Second Edition. Dem y
8vo. Cloth, price £2 2s.


Henry S. King 6°
Co.'s Publications. 19
MIRUS (Maj.-Gen. von).
Cavalry Field Duty. Trans-
lated by Major Frank S. Russell,
i4th (King's) Hussars. Crown 8vo.
Cloth limp, price 7s. 6d.
MIVART (St. George), F.R.S.
Contemporary Evolution:
An Essay on some recent Social
Changes. Post 8vo. Cloth, price
•js. 6d.
MOORE (Rev. D.), M.A.
Christ and His Church.
By the Author of " The Age and the
Gospel," &c. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3s-
MOORE (Rev. T.).
Sermonettes: on Synony-
mous Texts, taken from the Bible
and Book of Common Prayer, for
the Study, Family Reading, and
Private Devotion. Small crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 4s. 6d.
MORELL (J. R.).
Euclid Simplified in Me-
thod and Language. Being a
Manual of Geometry. Compiled from
the most important French. Works,
approved by the University of Paris
and the Minister of Public Instruc-
tion. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price ss. 6d.
MORICE (Rev. F. D.), M.A.
The Olympian and Pythian
Odes of Pindar. A New Transla-
tion in English Verse. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 7s. 6d.
MORLEY (Susan).
Aileen Ferrers. A Novel.
2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
Throstlethwaite. A Novel.
3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
MORSE (E. S.), Ph.D.
First Book of Zoology.
With numerous Illustrations. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
MOSTYN (Sydney).
Perplexity. A Novel. 3 vols.
Crown 8vo. Cloth.
MUSGRAVE (Anthony).
Studies in Political Eco-
nomy. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
My Sister Rosalind.
A Novel. By the Author of " Chris-
tiana North," and "Under the
Limes." 2 vols. Cloth.
NAAKE (J. T.).
Slavonic Fairy Tales.
From Russian, Servian, Polish, and
Bohemian Sources. With Four Illus-
trations. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
NEWMAN (J. H.), D.D.
Characteristics from the
Writings of. Being Selections
from his various Works. Arranged
with the Author's personal approval.
Second Edition. With Portrait.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
%* A Portrait of the late Rev. Dr.
J. H. Newman, mounted for framing,
can be had, price 2s. Gd,
NEWMAN (Mrs.).
Too Late. A Novel. 2 vols.
Crown 8vo. Cloth.
NEW WRITER (A).
Songs of Two Worlds.
By a New Writer. Third Series.
Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
The Epic of Hades. Fcap.
8vo. Cloth, pric« 5s.
NOBLE (J. A.).
The Pelican Papers.
Reminiscences and Remains of a
Dweller in the Wilderness. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
NORMAN PEOPLE (The).
The Norman People, and
their Existing Descendants in the
British Dominions and the United
States of America. Demy 8to.
Cloth, price 21s.
NORRIS (Rev. Alfred).
The Inner and Outer Life
Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
Northern Question (The);
Or, Russia's Policy in Turkey un-
masked. Demy8vo. Sewed, price is.


20
A List of
NOTREGE (John), A.M.
The Spiritual Function of
a Presbyter in the Church of
England. Crown 8vo. Cloth, red
edges, price 3s. 6d,
Oriental Sporting Magazine
(The).
A Reprint of the first 5 Volumes,
in 2 Volumes. Demy 8vo. Cloth,
price 2&s.
Our Increasing Military Dif-
ficulty, and one Way of Meeting it.
Demy 8vo. Stitched, price is.
PAGE (Capt. S. F.).
Discipline and Drill. Cheaper
Edition. Crown 8vo. Price is.
PALGRAVE (W. Gifford).
Hermann Agha. An Eastern
Narrative. 2 vols. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, extra gilt, price i8s.
PANDURANG HARI;
Or Memoirs of a Hindoo.
With an Introductory Preface by Sir
H. Bartle E. Frere, G.C.S.I., C.B.
2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 2 i$.
PARKER Joseph), D.D.
The Paraclete: An Essay
on the Personality and Ministry of
the Holy Ghost, with some reference
to current discussions. Second Edi-
tion. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price i2s.
PARR (Harriet).
Echoes of a Famous Year.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 8s. 6d.
PAUL (C. Kegan).
Goethe's Faust. A New
Translation in Rime. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 6s.
William Godwin: His
Friends and Contemporaries.
With Portraits and Facsimiles of the
Handwriting of Godwin and his
Wife. 2 vols. Square post 8vo.
Cloth, price 28$.
The Genius of Christianity
Unveiled. Being Essays never
before published. By William God-
win. Edited, with a Preface, by
C. Kegan Paul. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price js. 6d.
PAYNE (John).
Songs of Life and Death.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
PAYNE (Prof.).
Lectures on Education.
Price 6d. each.
I. Pestalozzi: the Influence of His
Principles and Practice.
II. Frobel and the Kindergarten
System. Second Edition.
III. The Science and Art of Educa-
tion.
IV. The True Foundation of Science
Teaching.
A Visit to German Schools:
Elementary Schools in Ger-
many. Notes of a Professional Tour
to inspect some of the Kindergartens,
Primary Schools, Public Girls*
Schools, and Schools for. Technical
Instruction in Hamburgh, Berlin,
Dresden, Weimar, Gotha, Eisenach,
in the autumn of i874. With Critical
Discussions of the General Principles
and Practice of Kindergartens and
other Schemes of Elementary Edu-
cation. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
4s. 6(f.
PEACOCKE (Georgiana).
Rays from the Southern
Cross: Poems. Crown 8vo. With
Sixteen Full-page Illustrations
by the Rev. P.Walsh. Cloth elegant,
price i0s. 6d.
PELLETAN (E.).
The Desert Pastor, Jean
Jarousseau. Translated from the
French. By Colonel E. P. De
L'Hoste. With a Frontispiece. New
Edition. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price
3$. 6d.
PENRICE (Maj. J.), B.A.
A Dictionary and Glossary
oftheKo-ran. With copious Gram-
matical References and Explanations
of the Text. 4to. Cloth, price 2is.
PERCEVAL (Rev. P.).
Tamil Proverbs, with their
English Translation. Containing
upwards of Six Thousand Proverbs.
Third Edition. Demy 8vo. Sewed,
price qs.


Henry S. King 6° Co.'s Publications. 21
PERRIER (A.).
A Winter in Morocco.
With Four Illustrations. A New
and Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
A Good Match. A Novel.
2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
PERRY (Rev. S. J.), F.R.S.
Notes of a Voyage to Ker-
guelen Island, to observe the
Transit of Venus. Demy8vo. Sewed,
price 2s.
PESCHEL, (Dr. Oscar).
The Races of Man and
their Geographical Distribution.
Large crown 8vo. Cloth, price 9s.
PETTIGREW (J. Bell), M.D.,
F.R.S.
Animal Locomotion; or,
Walking, Swimming, and Flying.
With i30 Illustrations. Second Edi-
tion. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5$.
Volume VII. of The International
Scientific Series.
PIGGOT (J.), F.S.A., F.R.G.S.
Persia—Ancient and Mo-
dern. Post8vo. Cloth, price ios. 6d.
POUSHKIN (A. S.).
Russian Romance.
Translated from the Tales of Eelkin,
etc. By Mrs. J. Buchan Telfer {nie
MouraviefT). Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price js. 6a.
POWER (H.).
Our Invalids: How shall
we Employ and Amuse Them?
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 2s. 6d.
POWLETT (Lieut. N.), R.A.
Eastern Legends and
Stories in English Verse. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5$.
PRESBYTER.
Unfoldings of Christian
Hope. An Essay showing that the
Doctrine contained in the Damna-
tory Clauses of the Creed commonly
called Athanasian is unscriptural.
Small crown 8vo. Cloth, price 4s. 6d.
PRICE (Prof. Bonamy).
Currency and Banking.
Crown 3vo. Cloth, price 6s.
PROCTOR (Richard A.), B.A.
Our Place among Infinities.
A Series of Essays contrasting our
little abode in space and time with
the Infinities around us. To which
are added Essays on '"Astrology,"
and "The Jewish Sabbath." Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, prioe
6s.
The Expanse of Heaven.
A Series of Essays on the Wonders
of the Firmament. With a Frontis-
piece. Second Edition. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 6s.
PUBLIC SCHOOLBOY.
The Volunteer, the Militia-
man, and the Regular Soldier.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5$.
RANKING (B. M.).
Streams from Hidden
Sources. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
6s.
Ready-Money Mortiboy.
A Matter-of-Fact Story. With Fron-
tispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
REANEY (Mrs. G. S.).
Waking and Working; or,
from Girlhood to Womanhood.
With a Frontispiece. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5s.
Sunbeam Willie, and other
Stories. Three Illustrations. Royal
i6mo. Cloth, price is. 6d.
Reginald Bramble.
A Cynic of the Nineteenth Century.
An Autobiography. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price i0s. 6d.
REID (T. Wemyss).
Cabinet Portraits. Bio-
graphical Sketches of Statesmen of
the Day. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
js. 6d.
RHOADES (James).
Timoleon. A Dramatic Poem.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.


22
A List of
RIBOT (Prof. Th.).
Contemporary English Psy-
chology. Second Edition. _ A Re-
vised and Corrected Translation from
the latest French Edition. Large
post 8vo. Cloth, price gs.
Heredity: A Psychological
Study on its Phenomena, its Laws,
its Causes, and its Consequences.
Large crown 8vo. Cloth, price gs.
ROBERTSON (The Late Rev.
F. W.), M.A., of Brighton.
The Late Rev. F. W.
Robertson, M.A., Life and Let-
ters of. Edited by the Rev. Stop-
ford Brooke, M.A., Chaplain in Or-
dinary to the Queen.
I. 2 vols., uniform with the Ser-
mons. With Steel Portrait. Crown
8va Cloth, price js. 6d.
II. Library Edition, in Demy 8vo.,
with Two Steel Portraits. Cloth,
price i2s.
III. A Popular Edition, in i vol.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
New.and Cheaper Editions:—
Sermons. Four Series. Small
crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3$. 6d. each.
Notes on Genesis. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
Expository Lectures on
St. Paul's Epistles to the Co-'
rinthians. A New Edition. Small
crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
Lectures and Addresses,
with other literary remains. A New
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
An Analysis of Mr. Tenny-
son's *' In Memoriam." (Dedi-
cated by Permission to the Poet-
Laureate.) Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price
2s.
The Education of the
Human Race. Translated from
the German of Gotthold Ephraim
Lessing. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price
2s. 6d.
The above Works can also be had
bound in half-morocco.
V A Portrait of the late Rev. F. W.
Robertson, mounted for framing, can
be had, price 2s. 6d.
ROSS (Mrs. E.), ("Nelsie Brook").
Daddy's Pet. A Sketch
from Humble Life. With Six Illus-
trations. Royal i6mo. Cloth, price
is.
RUSSELL (E. R.).
Irving as Hamlet. Second
Edition. Demy 8vo. Sewed, price
I$,
RUSSELL (W. C).
Memoirs of Mrs. Lsetitia
Boothby. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
7s. 6d.
SADLER (S. W.), R.N.
The African Cruiser. A
Midshipman's Adventures on the
West Coast. With Three Illustra-
tions. Second Edition. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
SAMAROW (G.).
For Sceptre and Crown. A
Romance of the Present Time.
Translated by Fanny Wormald. 2
vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price i5s.
SAUNDERS (Katherine).
The High Mills. A Novel.
3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
Gideon's Rock, and other
Stories. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6>.
Joan Merryweather,andother
Stories. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
Margaret and Elizabeth.
A Story of the Sea. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 6s.
SAUNDERS (John).
Israel Mort, Overman. A
Story of the Mine. 3 vols. Crown
8vo.
Hirell. With Frontispiece.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
Cheap Edition. With Frontis-
piece, price 2$.
Abel Drake's Wife. With
Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3$. 6d.
Cheap Edition. With Frontis-
piece, price 2s.


Henry S, King &*
Co.'s Publications. 23
SCHELL (Maj. von).
The Operations of the
First Army under Gen. Von
Goeben. Translated by CoL C. H.
von Wright. Four Maps. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price gs.
The Operations of the
First Army under Gen. Von
Steinmetz. Translated by Captain
E. O. Hollist. Demy 8vo. Cloth,
price jos. 6d.
SCHERFF (Maj. W. von).
Studies in the New In-
fantry Tactics. Parts I. and II.
Translated from the German by
Colonel Lumley Graham. Demy
8vq. Cloth, price js. 6d.
SCHMIDT (Prof. Oscar).
The Doctrine of Descent
and Darwinism. With 26 Illus-
trations. Third Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price c?.
Volume XII. of The International
Scientific Series.
SCHUTZENBERGER(Prof.F.).
Fermentation. With Nu-
merous Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5s.
Volume XX. of The International
Scientific Series.
SCOTT (Patrick).
The Dream and the Deed,
and other Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
SCOTT (W. T.).
Antiquities of an Essex
Parish; or, Pages from the History
of Great Dunmow. Crown 8vo,
Cloth, price 5s. Sewed, 4s.
SCOTT (Robert H.J.
Weather Charts and Storm
Warnings. Illustrated. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 3$. 6d.
Seeking his Fortune, and
other Stories. With Four Illustra-
tions. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
SENIOR (N. W.).
Alexis De Tocqueville.
Correspondence and Conversations
with Nassau W. Senior, from i833
to i859. Edited by M. C. M. Simp-
son. 2 vols. Large post 8vo. Cloth,
price 2i
Journals Kept in France
and Italy. From i848 to i852.
With a Sketch of the Revolution of
i848. Edited by his Daughter, M.
C. M. Simpson. 2 vols. Post 8vo.
Cloth, price 24s.
Seven Autumn Leaves from
Fairyland. Illustrated with Nine
Etchings. Square crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3$. 6d.
SEVD (Ernest), F.S.S.
The Fall in the Price of
Silver. Its Causes, its Consequen-
ces, and their Possible Avoidance,
with Special Reference to India.
Demy 8vo. Sewed, price 2s. 6d.
SHADWELL (Maj.-Gen.), C.B.
Mountain Warfare. Illus-
trated by the Campaign of i799 in
Switzerland. Being a Translation
of the Swiss Narrative compiled from
the Works of the Archduke Charles,
omini, and others. Also of Notes
y General H. Dufour on the Cam-
paign of the Valtelline in i635. With
Appendix, Maps, and Introductory
Remarks. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price
i6s.
SHELDON (Philip).
Woman's a Riddle; or, Baby
Warmstrey. A Novel. 3 vols. Crown
8vo. Cloth.
SHELLEY (Lady).
Shelley Memorials from
Authentic Sources. With (now
first printed) an Essay on Christian-
ity by Percy Bysshe Shelley. With
Portrait. Third Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
SHERMAN (Gen. W. T.).
Memoirs of General W.
T. Sherman, Commander of the
Federal Forces in the American Civil
War. By Himself, a vols._ With
Map. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 24s.
Co/yt igkt English Edition.
J
b


*4
A List of
SHIPLEY (Rev. Orby), M.A.
Church Tracts, or Studies
in Modern Problems. By various
Writers. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s. each.
SMEDLEY (M. B.).
Boarding-out and Pauper
Schools for Girls. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
SMITH (Edward), M.D., LL.B.,
F.R.S.
Health and Disease, as In-
fluenced by the Daily, Seasonal, and
other Cyclical Changes in the Human
System. A New Edition. Post 8vo.
Cloth, price 7s. 6d.
Foods. Profusely Illustrated.
Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
Volume III. of The International
Scientific Series.
Practical Dietary for
Families, Schools, and the La-
bouring Classes. A New Edition.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price 3$. 6d.
Tubercular Consumption
in its Early and Remediable
Stages. Second Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
SMITH (Hubert).
Tent Life with English
Gipsies in Norway. With Five
full-page Engravings and Thirty-one
smaller Illustrations by Whymper
and others, and Map of the Country
showing Routes. Third Edition.
Revised and Corrected. Post 8vo.
Cloth, price 2is.
Some Time in Ireland.
A Recollection. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price js. 6d.
Songs for Music.
By Four Friends. Square crown
8vo. Cloth, price cs.
Containing songs by Reginald A.
Gatty, Stephen H. Gatty, Greville
J. Chester, and Juliana Ewing.
SPENCER (Herbert).
The Study of Sociology.
Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
Volume V. of The International
Scientific Series.
SPICER (H.).
Otho's Death Wager. A
Dark Page of History Illustrated.
In Five Acts. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
STEVENSON (Rev. W. F.).
Hymns for the Church and
Home. Selected and Edited by the
Rev. W. Fleming Stevenson.
The most complete Hymn Book
published.
The Hymn Book consists of Three
Parts :—I. For Public Worship.—
11. For Family and Private Worship.
—III. For Children. _
%* Published hi various forms ana
Prices, the latter ranging from 8d.
to 6s. Lists and full particulars
luill be fumished on application to
the Publishers.
STEWART(Prof. Balfour), M.A.,
LL.D., F.R.S.
On the Conservation of
Energy. Third Edition. With
Fourteen Engravings. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5s.
Volume VI. of The International
Scientific Series.
STONEHEWER (Agnes).
Monacella: A Legend of
North Wales. A Poem. Fcap. 8vo.
Cloth, price 3$. 6d.
STRETTON (Hesba). Author of
"Jessica's First Prayer."
The Storm of Life. With
Ten Illustrations. Royal i6mo.
Cloth, price is. 6d.
The Crew of the Dolphin.
Illustrated. Eighth _ Thousand.
Royal i6mo. Cloth, price is. 6d.
Cassy. Twenty-ninth Thou-
sand. With Six Illustrations. Royal
i6mo. Cloth, price is. 6d.


Henry S. King cV> Co.'s Publications.
STRETTON (Hesba)—continued:
The King's Servants.
Thirty-fifth Thousand. With Eight
Illustrations. Royal i6mo. Cloth,
price is. 6d.
Lost Gip. Forty-eighth Thou-
sand. With Six Illustrations. Royal
i6mo. Cloth, price is. 6d.
*** A lso a handsomely bound Edi-
tion, ivith Twelve Illustrations,
price 2s. 6d.
Michel Lorio's Cross.
Strongly bound in blue cloth, gilt,
price is. 6d,
Friends till Death, and
other Stories. Strongly bound in
blue cloth, gilt, price is. 6d.
David Lloyd's Last Will.
Illustrated. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 2s. 6d.
The Wonderful Life.
Ninth Thousand. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 2s. 6d.
Friends till Death. With
Frontispiece. Fourteenth Thousand.
Royal i6mo. Limp cloth, price 6d.
Two Christmas Stories.
With Frontispiece. Eleventh Thou-
sand. Royal i6mo. Limp cloth,
price 6d.
Michel Lorio's Cross, and
Left Alone. With Frontispiece.
Seventh Thousand. Royal i6mo.
Limp cloth, price 6d.
Old Transome. With
Frontispiece. Ninth Thousand.
Royal i6mo. Limp cloth, price 6d.
*#* Taken from "The King's
Servants."
The Worth of a Baby, and
how Apple-Tree Court was
won. With Frontispiece. Ninth
Thousand. Royal i6mo. Limp
cloth, price 6d.
A Night and a Day. With
Frontispiece. Sixth Thousand. Royal
i6mo. Limp cloth, price 6d.
Hester Morley's Promise.
3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
The Doctor's Dilemma.
vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
STUMM (Lieut. Hugo), German
Military Attache" to the Khivan Ex-
pedition.
Russia's advance East-
ward. Based on the Official Reports
of. Translated by Capt. C. E. H.
Vincent. With Map. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 6s.
SULLY (James), M.A.
Sensation and Intuition.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price ios. 6d.
Sunnyland Stories.
By the Author of "Aunt Mary's Bran
Pie." Illustrated. Small8vo. Cloth,
price 3$. 6d.
SYME (David).
Outlines of an Industrial
Science. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
Tales of the Zenana.
By the Author of "Pandurang
Hari." 2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 2ij.
TAYLOR (Rev. J. W. A.), M.A.
Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
TAYLOR (Sir H.).
Edwin the Fair and Isaac
Comnenus. A New Edition.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
A Sicilian Summer and
other Poems. A New Edition.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
Philip Van Artevelde. A
Dramatic Poem. A New Edition.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 5$.
TAYLOR (Col. Meadows), C.S.I.,
M.R.I.A.
The Confessions ofa Thug.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
Tara: a Mahratta Tale.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
TELFER(J. Buchan), F.R.G.S.,
Commander R.N.
The Crimea and Trans-
Caucasia. With numerous Illus-
trations and Maps. 2 vols. Medium
8vo. Cloth, price 36s.


26
A List of
TENNYSON (Alfred).
Harold. A Drama. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 6s.
Queen Mary. A Drama.
New Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 6s.
TENNYSON (Alfred).
Cabinet Edition. Ten Volumes. Each
with Frontispiece. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 2s. 6d. each.
Cabinet Edition, iovols. Com-
plete in handsome Ornamental Case.
Price 28s.
TENNYSON (Alfred).
Author's Edition. Complete in Five
Volumes. Post 8vo. Cloth gilt ; or
half-morocco, Roxburgh style.
Vol. I. Early Poems, and
English Idylls. Price 6s.; Rox-
burgh, js. 6d.
Vol. IX Locksley Hall,
Lucretius, and other Poems.
Price 6s. ; Roxburgh, 7s. 6d.
Vol. III. The Idylls of
the King (Complete). Price is. 6d.\
Vol. IV. The Princess,
and Maud. Price 6s.; Roxburgh,
7$. 6d.
Vol. V. Enoch Arden,
and In Memoriam. Price 6s.;
Roxburgh, 7s. 6d.
TENNYSON (Alfred).
Original Editions.
Poems. Small 8vo. Cloth,
price 6s.
Maud, and other Poems.
Small Svo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
The Princess. Small 8vo.
Cloth, price 3$. 6d.
TENNYSON (Alfred).
Original Editions.
Idylls of the King. Small
Bvo. Cloth, price 5s.
Idylls of the King. Com-
plete. Small 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
The Holy Grail, and other
Poems. Small 8vo. Cloth, price
4s. 6d. /
Gareth and Lynette. Small
8vo. Cloth, price 3$.
Enoch Arden, &c. Small
8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
Selections from the above
Works. Super royal i6mo. Cloth,
price 3s. 6d. Cloth gilt extra, price 4s
Songs from the above
Works. Super royai ifimo. Cloth
extra, price 3s. 6d.
In Memoriam. Small 8vo.
Cloth, price 4s.
TENNYSON (Alfred).
The Illustrated Edition. 1
vol. Large 8vo. Gilt extra, price 25s.
Library Edition. In 6 vols.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price i0s. 6d. each.
Pocket Volume Edition.
ii vols. _ In neat case, price 3is. 6d.
Ditto, ditto. Extra cloth gilt, in case
price 35s.
Tennyson's Idylls of the
King, and other Poems. Illustrated
by Julia Margaret Cameron. 2 vols.
Folio. Half-bound morocco, cloth
sides, price £6 6s. each.
THOMAS (Moy).
A Fight for Life. With
Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3$. 6d.


Henry S. King &
Co.'s Publications. 27
Thomasina.
A Novel. 2 vols. Crown 8vo.
Cloth.
THOMPSON (Alice C).
Preludes. A Volume of
Poems. Illustrated by Elizabeth
Thompson (Painter of "The Roll
Call"). 8vo. Cloth, price 7s. 6d.
THOMPSON (Rev. A. S.).
Home Words for Wan-
derers. A Volume of Sermons.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
Thoughts in Verse.
Small Crown 8vo. Cloth, price is. 6d.
THRING (Rev. Godfrey), B.A.
Hymns and Sacred Lyrics.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
TODD (Herbert), M.A.
Arvan; or, The Story of the
Sword. A Poem. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 7s. 6d.
TODHUNTER (Dr. J.)
Laurella; and other Poems.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s. 6d.
TRAHERNE (Mrs. A.).
The Romantic Annals of
a Naval Family. A New and
Cheaper Edition. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5s.
TRAVERS (Mar.).
The Spinsters of Blatch-
ington. A Novel. 2 vols. Crown
8vo. Cloth.
TREMENHEERE (Lieut-Gen.
C. W.)
Missions in India: the
System of Education in Government
and Mission Schools contrasted.
Demy 8vo. Sewed, price 2s.
TURNER (Rev. C. Tennyson).
Sonnets, Lyrics, and Trans-
lations. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
4& 6d.
TYNDALLQohn), LL.D.,F.R.S.
The Forms of Water in
Clouds and Rivers, Ice and
and Glaciers. With Twenty-five
Illustrations. Sixth Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
Volume I. of The International
Scientific Series.
UMBRA OXONIENSIS.
Results of the expostu-
lation of the Right Honourable
W. E. Gladstone, in their
Relation to the Unity of Roman
Catholicism. Large fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 5$.
UPTON (Richard D.), Capt.
Newmarket and Arabia*.
An Examination of the Descent of
Racers and Coursers. With Pedi-
grees and Frontispiece. Post 8vo.
Cloth, price gs.
VAMBERY (Prof. A.).
Bokhara: Its History and
Conquest. Second Edition. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price iSs.
VAN BENEDEN (Mons.).
Animal Parasites and
Messmates, With 83 Illustrations.
Second Edition. Cloth, price 5s.
Volume XIX. of The International
Scientific Series.
VANESSA.
By the Author of "Thomasina"
&c. 1 A Novel. 2 vols. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
VAUGHAN (Rev. C. J.), D.D.
Words of Hope from the
Pulpit of the Temple Church.
Third Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5s.
The Solidity of true Re-
ligion, and other Sermons. Preached
in London during the Election and
Mission Week, February, i874.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d,


28
A List of
VAUGHAN (Rev. C. J.), D.D.—
continued.
Forget Thine own People.
An Appeal for Missions. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
The Young Life equipping
Itself For God's Service. Being
Four Sermons Preached before the
University of Cambridge, in Novem-
ber, i872. Fourth Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
VINCENT (Capt. C. E. H.).
Elementary Military
Geography, Reconnoitring,
and Sketching. Compiled for
Non - Commissioned Officers and
Soldiers of all Arms. Square
crown 8vo. Cloth, price 2s. 6d.
Vizcaya; or, Life in the Land
of the Carlists at the Outbreak of the
Insurrection, with some Account of
the Iron Mines and other Characteris-
tics of the Country. With a Map and
Eight Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price gs.
VOGEL (Dr. Hermann).
The Chemical effects of
Light and Photography, in their
application to Art, Science, and
Industry. The translation thoroughly
revised. With i00 Illustrations, in-
cluding some beautiful specimens of
Photography. Third Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
Volume XV. of The International
Scientific Series.
VYNER (Lady Mary).
Every day a Portion.
Adapted from the Bible and the
Prayer Book, for the Private Devo-
tions of those living in Widowhood.
Collected and edited by Lady Mary
Vyner. Square crown 8vo. Cloth
extra, price
Waiting for Tidings.
By the Author of "White and
Black." 3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
WARTENSLEBEN (Count H.
von).
The Operations of the
South Army in January and
February, i87i. Compiled from
the Official War Documents of the
Head-quarters of the Southern Army.
Translated by Colonel C. H. von
Wright. With Maps. Demy gvo.
Cloth, price 6$.
The Operations of the
First Army under Gen. von
Manteuffel. Translated by Colonel
C. H. von Wright. Uniform with
the above. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price
gs.
WAY (A.), M.A.
The Odes of Horace Liter-
ally Translated in Metre. Fcap.
8vo. Cloth, price 2s.
WEDMORE (F.).
Two Girls. 2 vols. Crown
8vo. Cloth.
WELLS (Capt. John C.), R.N.
Spitzbergen—The Gate-
way to the Polynia ; or, A Voyage
to Spitzbergen. With numerous Il-
lustrations by Whymper and others,
and Map. New and Cheaper Edi-
tion. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.
WETMORE(W. S.).
Commercial Telegraphic
Code. Second Edition. Post 4to.
Boards, price 42j.
What 'tis to Love.
By the Author of "Flora Adair,"
"The Valueof Fosterstown." 3V0IS.
Crown 8vo. Cloth.
WHITAKER (Florence).
Christy's Inheritance. A
London Story. Illustrated. Royal
i6mo. Cloth, price is. 6d.
WHITE (A. D.), LL.D.
Warfare of Science. With
Prefatory Note by Professor Tyndall.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.


Henry S. King 6°
Co.'s Publications. 29
WHITE (Capt. F. B. P.).
The Substantive Seniority
Army List—Majors and Cap-
tains. 8vo. Sewed, price 2s. 6d.
WHITNEY (Prof. W. D.), of Yale
College, New Haven.
The Life and Growth of
Language. Second Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s. Copyright
Edition.
Volume XVI. of The International
Scientific Series.
WHITTLE (J. L.), A.M.
Catholicism and the Vati-
can. With a Narrative of the Old
Catholic Congress at Munich.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 4*. 6d.
WICKHAM (Capt. E. H., R.A.)
Influence of Firearms upon
Tactics: Historical and Critical
Investigations. By an Officer of
Superior Rank (in the German
Army). Translated by Captain E.
H. Wickham, R.A. Demy 8vo.
Cloth, price js. 6d.
WILBERFORCE (H. W.).
The Church and the Em-
pires. Historical Periods. Pre-
ceded by a Memoir of the Author
by John Henry Newman, D.D. of
the Oratory. With Portrait. Post
8vo. Cloth, price \os. 6d.
WILKINSON (T. L.).
Short Lectures on the Land
Laws. Delivered before the Work-
ing Men's College. Crown 8vo.
Limp Cloth, price ss.
WILLIAMS (A. Lukyn).
Famines in India; their
Causes and Possible Prevention.
The Essay for the Le Bas Prize, i875.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
WILLIAMS (Rowland), D.D.
Life and Letters of, with Ex-
tracts from his Note-Books. Edited
by Mrs. Rowland Williams. With
a Photographic Portrait. 2 vols.
Large post 8vo. Cloth, price 24s.
WILLIAMS (Rowland), D.D.-
continued.
The Psalms, Litanies,
Counsels and Collects for De-
vout Persons. Edited by his
Widow. New and Popular Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3s. 6d.
WILLOUGHBY (The Hon.
Mrs.).
On the North Wind —
Thistledown. A Volume of Poems,
Elegantly bound. Small crown 8vo.
Cloth, price js. 6d.
WILSON (H. Schiitz).
Studies and Romances.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price js. 6d.
WILSON (Lieut.-Col. C. T.).
James the Second and the
Duke of Berwick. Demy 8vo.
Cloth, price i2s. 6d.
WINTERBOTHAM (Rev. R.),
M.A., B.Sc.
Sermons and Expositions.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 7s. 6d.
WOINOVITS (Capt. I.),
Austrian Cavalry Exercise.
Translated by Captain W. S. Cooke.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 7s.
WOOD (C. F.).
A Yachting Cruise in the,
South Seas. With Six Photo-
graphic Illustrations. Demy 8vo.
Cloth, price js. 6d.
WRIGHT (Rev. David), M.A.
Man and Animals: A Ser-
mon. Crown 8vo. Stitched in
wrapper, price u.
WRIGHT (Rev. David), M.A.
Waiting for the Light, and
other Sermons. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 6s.
WYLD(R. S.), F.R.S.E.
The Physics and the Philo-
sophy of the Senses; or, The
Mental and the Physical in their
Mutual Relation. Illustrated by
several Plates. Demy 8vo. Cloth,
price i6s.


3°
A List of
YONGE (C. D.).
History of the English
Revolution of i688. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 6s.
YORKE (Stephen).
Cleveden. A Novel. 2 vols.
Crown 8vo. Cloth.
YOUMANS (Eliza A.).
An Essay on the Culture
of the Observing Powers of
Children, especially in connection
with the Study of Botany. Edited,
with ^Jotes and a Supplement, by
Joseph Payne, F. C. P., Author of
Lectures on the Science and Art of
Education," &c. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 2s. 6d.
YOUMANS (Eliza k Continued.
First Book of Botany.
Designed to Cultivate the Observing
Powers of Children. With 300 En-
gravings. New and Enlarged Edi-
tion. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
YOUMANS (Edward L.), M.D.
A Class Book of Chemistry.
on the Basis of the New System.
With 200 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. .
Cloth, price 5s.
ZIMMERN (H.).
Stories in Precious Stones.
With Six Illustrations. Third Edi-
tion. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
December, 1876.
NEW BOOKS NOW IN THE PRESS.
THE HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF MAN.
By Professor E. Haeckel, Author of " The History of Creation." Translated
by Professor Van Rhyn. 2 vols., profusely illustrated.
SERMONS. Third Series. By the Rev. Stopford A. Brooke,
M.A., Chaplain in Ordinary to Her Majesty the Queen, and Minister at
Bedford Chapel, Bloomsbury. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
INTERNATIONAL LAW OR RULES REGU-
LATING THE INTERCOURSE OF STATES IN PEACE
AND WAR. By H. W. Halleck, A.M., Author of "Elements of
Military Art and Science," "Mining Laws of Spain and Mexico," &c.
Edited, with copious Notes and Additions, by G. Sherston Baker,
Barrister-at-Law. 2 vols. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 38s.
HISTORY OF THE ORGANIZATION, EQUIPMENT,
AND WAR SERVICES OF THE REGIMENT OF BENGAL
ARTILLERY. Compiled from published Official Records, and various
private Sources. By Francis W. Stubds, Major Royal (late Bengal)
Artillery. With numerous Maps and Illustrations. 2 vols. Demy 8vo. Cloth.
GREENLAND AND ITS INHABITANTS. By the
Chevalier Dr. Henry Rink, President of the Greenland Board of Trade.
With sixteen Illustrations, drawn by the Eskimo, and a Map. Edited by
Dr. Robert Brown.


New Books now in the Press.
3i
TRAVELS IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF BRUCE IN
ALGERIA AND TUNIS. Illustrated by Facsimiles of his Original
Drawings. By Lieut.-Col. R. L. Playfair, H. B. M.'s Consul-General in
Algeria.
A BALOOCHEE GRAMMAR. By Capt. E. C. Mockler,
Assistant Political Agent on the Mekran Coast. Fcap. 8vo.
NEW READINGS AND RENDERINGS OF SHAKE-
SPEARE'S TRAGEDIES. By H. H. Vaughan. Demy 8vo. Cloth.
AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL RECOLLECTIONS OF SIR
JOHN BOWRING. Edited by his son, Lewin B. Bowring. One
Vol. Demy 8vo. With a Steel Engraving after the Medallion by David.
A TRIP TO CASHMERE AND LADAK. By Cowley
Lambert, F.R.G.S. One Vol. Crown J3vo. Illustrated.
A DISCOURSE ON TRUTH. By Richard Shute, M.A.,
Christ Church, Oxon. One Vol. Large crown 8vo.
POEMS: MEDITATIVE AND LYRICAL. By Aubrey
de Vere. Large fcap. 8vo.
PUDDINGS AND SWEETS, being Three Hundred and
Sixty-Five Receipts approved by experience. Crown 8vo. price 2s. 6ii.
TENNYSON. EXTRACTS FOR SCHOOLS AND
RECITATIONS. In foolscap 8vo.
THE SWEET SILVERY SAYINGS OF SHAKE-
SPEARE ON THE SOFTER SEX. Compiled by an Old Soldier.
Crown 8vo. Cloth gilt extra.
IONE. A Poem, in four Parts. By the Author of "Shadows
of Coming Events." Foolscap 8vo. Cloth, price 5s.
THE EPIC OF HADES. Parts I. and III. Completing the
Work. By a New Writer. Foolscap 8vo. Cloth, price 3*. 6d.
HEBE: A Tale. By Lieutenant M. H. G. Goldie. Foolscap
8vo. Cloth.
Henry S. King &* Co., London.


ElZEVIR PRESS'—PRINTED BY JOHN C. WILKINP,
9, CASTLE STREET, CHANCERY LANE.
