

foZZttl
•Y89
8 1\
- - __
-i»iL>' •y



Xibrarp.
of tbe
University of XKIlisconsin
PRESENTED BY
JOSEFli JASTROW




^O^^^^ ^C^ 4f- sf<y
^ / ?S^ ^z & )





Hfte Jltfiijt of CrutJf
BY
ERARDUS SAGRA.v^^-•*
V.v^C*u?> Vans SeU.e,T
First investigate thoroughly—
then judge.
Prejudice is the enemy
of all fairness and progress ;—
Investigation is the champion
of Truth.
THE PROGRESSIVE PUBLISHING COMPANY
1524-1526 CHESTNUT STREET
PHILADELPHIA, PENNA.


Copyright, 1909
By
M. VAN GELDEK


335208
RUG 28 1928
INDEX
PAGE
Why "The Might of Truth" was written 5
What does "The Might of Truth "reveal? 9
What is the basis of Modern Theism? 9
Introductory Remarks to "The Might of Truth" io
"The Might of Truth" 13
"What was," "What is" and "What will be" eternally? 13
What is the self-evident first Truth? 13
Divine non-personal law 14
God 14
Nothing 15
Time and Space 15
Eternal Strength and Power 15
Eternal Crossing 15
Matter 15
Where is the eternal matter-source? . 18
Life 18
Motion 19
Eternal Contraction and Expansion 19
The heart's relation to eternal Contraction and Expansion 19
Light 20
Thought 20
Soul • 20
The immortality of the Soul 21
Death 21
Do we lose consciousness after death? 22
Spirit 22
Deception in Spiritualism 23 -25-26
Telepathy 23
The repeating of thought indentations after death 24
Prophecies 24
Seeing events at a distance . . 24
Visions 26
Rotation 28
Suns 28
The cooling off of suns 29
Rotating spirals, rings and balls 29-31
The largest fire ball or Central Sun 31


PAGE
Gravitation 32-34
The relation of "true love" and "intense hate " to gravitation ... 35
General absorption and re-formation in consequence of gravitation . . 35
A glimpse of the Solar System 36
The Cross and other line combinations 38
The relation of male and female to Saturn (44)
The unconscious soul of the Universe 39
Truth personified 40
The three-in-one form and consequences 40
The cause of the egg-shape and other forms (43)
Consciousness 45-48
Instinct... 47
Self-consciousness 48
Reason 48
FreeWill 48
Balance 50
The so-called "God's Will" 52
The double self 53
Conscience 54
The sensitiveness of the ethereal brain 55
Is the ethereal body destructible? 55
Is there a Providence? 56
Does destiny exist? 57
Is there Divine justice? 57
Is there Divine punishment? 58
Is there Divine reward? 58
Spiritual Hell 59
Has the sinner also rest after death? 59
The cause of sin and virtue 59
Inborn tendencies of character 60
Faith 60
Duty 62
God's Voice 63
The Jesus Christ-Being 63
Thou shall not kill 63
True Music .... 64
Homage to Truth 64
Spiritual Heaven (58)-64
Looking back and looking forward to "The Might of Truth" . . . .66
International Peace 68
The International Society of Progressives 69


Why "THE MIGHT OF TRUTH" was written.
Let us suppose that several men and women should de-
cide to form a society for the improvement of morals,
based on destruction regardless of life and property, be-
cause what they call the Lord, in His infinite goodness, also
destroys cities, life and property by his earthquakes, torna-
does, floods, lightning, etc., for the general good of hu-
manity, according to their way of arguing and also be-
cause the Bible says that we shall "follow God." Let us
further suppose that this society would consider it a great
blessing in general to cause endless misery by dynamiting
and partially burning a city; maiming and killing men,
women and children; pinning down, starving and roasting
innocent babies; destroying works of art, etc., which is ex-
actly what God did in many cities. Let us also suppose that
their argument would be: "Although God, the Creator of
the glorious universe and its endless variety of products,
maimed, roasted alive and killed good as well as bad people,
it is our duty to follow in His footsteps, because after all
thousands of people received what they deserved; and al-
though many innocent babies and adults have to suffer for
the sins of others, there are thousands who will be benefited
in many ways by our imitating God's example." The pro-
moters of such a scheme would be sent to an insane asy-
lum. Yet although a society of such followers of God does
not exist, their personal God did and daily does those things.
That same God was thanked in places of worship by those
who lived through the greatest calamity, regardless of the
fact that relatives of theirs had been maimed or killed by
Him. Now anyone who reasons rationally says: "There
is no logic in this." Neither is there any logic in the words:
"Be always in harmony with nature, for God is in nature,
and to be always in harmony with nature is to be always
with God, and to be always with God is to be always good


and just." Why is there no logic in this way of reason-
ing? Because to be always in harmony with nature, would
justify destruction, arson, drowning, maiming and killing
generally. Is it not time, therefore, to look the reality in
the face?
Many believers, however, will ask: "Is there no om-
nipotent God?" "Is there no personal supreme being—
who can act as he sees fit, even though we may not grasp
the meaning of his acts?" "Did not God prove by sending
Christ that He exists?" "Was this not proven by Christ's
resurrection and Christ's ascension to Heaven?" "Is it not
proven by thousands of blessings and the wonderful uni-
verse itself?"
Jesus Christ deserves the deepest reverence; most of
His philosophy is practical, but, after all, Christ as the his-
torian Sepher Toldoth said in one of the evangels, was the
son of Jeschua Josephus Pandera (a fact known to many
investigators). The same historian states that Jeschua Jo-
sephus Pandera lived with Mir jam (which means Maria),
a Hebrew girl of Bethlehem, who became Christ's mother.
(See Haeckel's "Die Weltrathsel," page 387).* Just the
same as the statement about the abnormal birth of Christ
is not correct, just so the ascension to Heaven is a symbol;
for since Christ was flesh and blood, and since flesh and
blood are heavier than cold or warm vapor, of which a
cloud consists, Christ could never have been supported or
lifted by a cloud. Of course, belief simply says: "With
God all is possible; never mind whether there is any logic
in it or not." But the thinking and not blindly believing
mind says: "It cannot be thus." Christianity (including
the belief in a personal Creator) may be looked upon as
symbolical as far as the mystic part is concerned; but as
a philosophy and in a somewhat modified form will stand
forever and should be practiced to its utmost limit. Nat-
urally the idea of a personal Creator is so inrooted through
generations and generations that it is in many cases impos-
sible to argue against it; and why should one try to con-
vince when there is no longing whatever to investigate, in
consequence of belief giving satisfaction. The believer rea-
* Published by Emil Strauss, Bonn, Germany.
6


sons as follows: "Science makes wonderful discoveries,
but has never told us where power, matter and mind came
from;" and here is another argument of belief:
"The wheels of a watch cannot be made without in-
telligence; nor can they be put together without intelligence;
nor could the watch have been invented or created without
intelligence; nor could it be kept running without intelli-
gence; nor could it be repaired without intelligence. This
being a clear fact, how much more intelligence is required
to create man—the most wonderful automatic and at the
same time conscious device, if we may call it so. The won-
derful mind which created man; this wonderful mind which
created the different self-acting parts of which man is con-
structed; this wonderful mind which keeps this automatic
and self-willed machine in running order; this wonderful
mind which caused the universe (a gigantic clock running
with wonderful regularity), this wonderful mind which
keeps the wonderful universal clock running, must be a
super-mind or God;:—a mind far above the human mind."
"How is it possible that there can be an unbeliever after this
logical comparison?" is a question which the believer nat-
urally will address to anyone who wishes to dispute this
fact. "How is it possible that there can be one Atheist or
one Agnostic? Man does everything on a small scale in
comparison to God; man punishes on a small scale; but God
often punishes on a large scale, although apparently in a
most cruel and unjust manner. However, just the same as
men accomplish great works which people with less brain
capacity cannot understand, so does God do things which
go entirely against our way of reasoning, because even the
most developed human brain capacity is at the same time
most insignificant in comparison to God's mind." Thus the
believer reasons and seemingly has the indisputable right
of way. Rationalism, however, asks: "Of what does the
watch and of what does the universe, men and mind con-
sist?" The watch no doubt is the fruit of the human mind,
but the difference between the watch, the universe, and the
human being, is that a human being is the result (as we will
see later on) of self-evident mechanical, symmetrical, chemi-


cal action, and the watch is the result of intellect. Chemical
action often causes motions which appear to be founded on
premeditation, but which are founded in reality on the self-
evident main action, self-evident counteraction and the self-
evident mingling of both. This result of both is a new self-
evident basis for another self-evident counteraction, etc.,
by which man was the result; for man, after all, is but a
self-evident chain of action and counteraction; a chain of
chemical combinations in consequence of gravitation, caused
by positive and negative currents. Man is a combination
of positive and negative currents, the essence of which
causes vibrations called mind; vibrations which are mind,
when focused or united either in insect, man, beast, bird, or
any other living creature.
But what causes the positive and negative currents?
Since gravitation, as will be proven later on, existed
eternally, eternal positive and negative currents or eternal
power always existed in eternal matter, and the universe as
well as man, animal, insect, consciousness, etc., had to be.
It will be proven that positive and negative currents could
not but exist, and cannot be but evenly balanced on account
of endlessness being eternally distributed everywhere in
endless quantity. Balance, whether self-acting or not, is
order. Order includes all intermediate balanced or ordered
combinations in matter and motion, causing ultimately vibra-
tions which are mind, when focused, whether in insect,
man, or beast, and whether consisting of small or great
capacity. But what causes the original, eternal positive (or
attracting) and negative (or repulsing) currents? What
causes eternal gravitation? What causes eternal power?
What causes eternal matter? What causes eternal motion?
What causes eternal rotation? What causes the universe,
man and mind?
A CAUSE:
"THE FIRST CAUSE."
But "how," and what is the first cause?
One can arrive step by step only at the answer to all
these questions, but not without rational analysis; for ra-


tional analysis is the only way by which one can attain satis-
factory results.
Before arriving at the analysis proper of all these ques-
tions however, several introductory remarks are necessary
to prevent possible misunderstandings.
Since the "Bible" does not scientifically nor logically
explain our relations to our surroundings, thousands of
minds tried and are still trying to find the truth of the
"why" and the "because" for the existence of the universe
and everything connected therewith. This is how "The
Might of Truth" came to be written.
What does "THE MIGHT OF TRUTH" Reveal?
"The Might of Truth" reveals the author's "Religion"
and might also be called "Modern Theism."
Modern Theism (in opposition to "Atheism," or against
God, and "Agnosticism," or uncertainty about God's exist-
ence) is based on popular logic.
"What is popular logic?
Self-evident deductions explained in popular language.
What are self-evident deductions?
Common sense.
What is the basis of MODERN THEISM?
i. That there is no effect without a cause, consequently
that there self-evidently exists a first cause which we call
God.
2. That reason independent of time, space, power
and matter cannot be the foundation of the universe and
consciousness, on account of self-evident inevitable proofs.
3. That the first cause gradually commences to under-
stand itself by a self-evident process; that this self-under-


standing gradually disappears during the general dissolving
of the universe which is bound to take place on account of
self-evident causes.
4. That in consequence of these causes this self-under-
standing reappears, disappears and reappears again and
again without end, although the first cause itself remains
unchangeable through all eternity.
5. That we feel like worshiping or rendering the high-
est homage to the noblest in thought, in form, in acts, in
nature.
6. That we feel like worshiping the Truth in any form,
whether this form be conscious or not.
7. That this worshiping consists either in the highest
admiration or love or both.
8. That this admiration or love or both are holy.
9. That the spirit which prompted these feelings is
higher than power and matter, although power and matter
express the former (the spirit); for thought, although de-
pendent on brain and body, is the superior of both, just the
same as fragrance (which is dependent on flower and stem),
is superior to the rose.
Introductory Remarks
To
"THE MIGHT OF TRUTH."
Truth is used as starting point, but although this be
the case, one cannot in reality talk about starting in this in-
stance, because there is no beginning of truth.
"Time" and "Space" are two negatives. In reality
they are "Nothing," yet cannot be called relative terms only
(made possible by matter), for (as will be proven), matter
is made possible by space and time.
It is a known fact in mathematics that two crossing
negatives are equal to one positive. If one negative neutral-
izes or counteracts another negative there is left something;
for instance: "I see nothing of nothing" is equal to "I see


something;" or the sentence: "I do not want no bread" (or
two negatives) is equal to: "I want bread" (or something).
Thus:—matter (or +) is something made possible
by "Space" and "Time," or one negative neutralizing the
other negative.
We see consequently that "something" is made possi-
ble, not by the addition or multiplication, but by the cross-
ing of two negatives, which in reality constitute "nothing"
when separated.
Of course: nothing can come from "nothing" if one
considers "nothing' to consist of one negative only, but
"nothing" contains just as well two negatives as one nega-
tive; and nobody can deny that two negatives crossing and
consequently neutralizing each other are one positive or
something.
Neither can anybody deny that matter is something,
consequently equal to two crossing negatives which "Time"
and "Space" are. Matter is visible and invisible time and
space united.
"Time," "Space," "Power" and "Matter" are Truths,
eternally (that is to say, without a beginning and without
an ending), branching off from the first cause or Super-
Truth.
"Super-Truth" {the -first cause), which means Truth
by Itself, was cause of Itself without a beginning and with-
out an ending.
"Individuality" has a beginning because self-conscious-
ness has a beginning (in a certain sense) after one has been
formed and born. Before birth one has no self-conscious-
ness.
Everything with a beginning has an end, therefore
consciousness ends with death; and reason or the effect
which follows consciousness or the cause of it, as proven,
cannot be the foundation of the "Universe." For: our rea-
son formerly called the eternal part or spark of the so-called


x-
fundamental or so-called personal God, would exist before
as well as directly after birth, if "Reason" were the be-
ginning of the Universe, and if this had been the case, our
reason or part of the fundamental so-called Creator, would
also eternally have been conscious of its existence and its
acts, which as we know from our own experience it was not.
Consequently reason is not, can not be the foundation of the
Universe, for reason (including consciousness) is not eter-
nal, not without a beginning. This explains the unreason-
able, monstrous, wild beast-like destruction of life and prop-
erty by earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, light-
ning, famine and thousands of horrible events, the misery
of which in turn is self-evidently counterbalanced by self-
evident joy and great benefits to others, financially or other-
wise.
The self-evident eternal "positive," or eternal (conse-
quently beginningless) crossing of the eternal two nega-
tives (Time and Space), also proves that reason is totally
unnecessary to the existence of their neutralizing each
other, the eternal result of which is called "Matter;" in
other words: "positivized," that is "materialized" Time and
Space.
Consequently matter was never created, for to create
is to form with reason, to make with reason, to begin
something with reason, and neither "Time" nor "Space"
were made or formed or created; yet "Matter" is "the first
eternal positive," and any positive always consists of two
negatives neutralizing each other.
Neither is reason or the outcome of the vibrations of
chemical processes and gravity (as will be proven later on),
necessary to the existence of "Power," "Motion," and
"brain-vibrations," because the latter motion causes "Rea-
son" itself.
Previously it has been stated that everything with a
beginning has an end, but "Motion" even when apparently
immovable, has no beginning or end in reality, because one
12


motion is always the direct outcome of a previous motion,
which again is the outcome of another previous motion.
Anything without a beginning has no end. Therefore, al-
though consciousness has a beginning (in a certain sense),
the motion which caused consciousness and which will
end consciousness, is without a beginning as well as with-
out an end. Although the vibrations of consciousness
change into unconscious vibrations, the vibrations them-
selves are beginningless and endless, therefore unborn and
undying.
"THE MIGHT OF TRUTH."
What is the answer to:
What was, what is and what will be eternally?
(Before we can commence to talk about Time, Space,
Power and Matter?)
"SUPER-TRUTH."
That is to say:
Truth by Itself, Truth as a unit, Truth above all other
Truths.
What is Truth?
Truth is what is—
Truth is fact—
Truth is Re-ing—
Truth is reality.
What is self-evidently the first Truth?
The first Truth is the Truth of the existence of Self-
evidence, or the Inevitable.
And what is inevitable?
It is Inevitable that the Truth itself existed forever,
that Truth is
Super-Existence, and the eternal cause of the eternal
or never-born, never-dying effect called "Nature."
13


Truth is "Super" or "above" its eternal main-effect call-
ed the Universe or Nature. Consequently Truth is super-
natural;
and:
"The first cause/'
of all self-evident or inevitable EFFECTS of itself.
And what are inevitable or self-evident effects?
Non-human Laws; Super-human Laws.
That is to say:
DIVINE, NON-PERSONAL LAWS.
Why Divine?
Because of their purity and non-personality.
And what else are Divine Laws?
Divine Laws are self-evident main-effects, which at the
same time are causes with their inevitable effects, and so
forth, not made by man or any thinking personal being.
"Divine Laws" were eternally and always will be self-
existing, unmade, unborn and undying, inevitable or self-
evident MAIN-CONSEQUENCES
of
The inevitable or self-evident
First Cause,
or
SUPER-TRUTH,
Called:
GOD.
"Super-Truth" and the Inevitable consequences
WITH THEIR EFFECTS, are figuratively or in the way
of comparison equal to
"THE LORD,"
"HIS LAWS,"
and
"EVENTS."
14


It is true and inevitable that the first eternal and unborn
branch of the first cause should be:
"NOTHING"
consisting of two "Main-Negatives":
"TIME and SPACE,"
or
Nothing endlessly enlarged and endlessly diminished.
Eternal crossing or union is, wherever the crossing
takes place: (as "Nature" proves)
"ETERNAL STRENGTH OR POWER."
In other words: "Nature" proves that the endless
centre of endless crossing is endless power, for power is
crossing.
Eternal Crossing is also eternal concentration, because
where crossing takes place exists concentration, and eternal
concentration by itself is: (as nature proves)
"MATTER,"
whether visible or invisible.
But what does the crossing of space and time consist of?
What is "Space"? What is "Time"?
"Space" is distance; "Time" is the past, the present,
the future (of no events), all eternally in one; consequently:
"Space and Time united" are
"Distances" which existed and will exist eternally
in an endlessly enlarged and endlessly diminished condition;
in other words:
"Space and Time" united are eternal distance; be-
ginningless distance and endless distance.
The distances cross each other everywhere; and since
crossing is equal to concentration:
Power and Matter united are (either lightly or highly)
"concentrated eternal distance;" and eternal concentrated or
crossing distance is:
"The Eternal Something" called "Matter,"
a "positive" which is equal to two crossing negatives: Time
and Space; because one positive always is equal to two nega-
15


tives crossing each other; therefore, there is positive or mat-
ter everywhere, whether invisible or visible.
Consequently we see:
First: that "Super-Truth" or "Truth" by Itself is the
first cause:
Second: that Time and Space are the eternally united
two main-negatives, or the self-evident unchangeable, un-
conscious, unborn and undying or eternal beginningless and
endless consequences of the first cause:
Third: that the beginningless and endless something
is self-evidently the eternal (consequently not created) be-
ginningless branch of the first cause, and that this first "Posi-
tive" or "Something" is the eternal crossing or union of the
two main-negatives which are nothing and yet something
on account of their eternal crossing, the endless property or
capacity of which is:
Endless power.
The backward analysis in a few words is this:
Where eternal distances cross is power; because cross-
ing is power; consequently everywhere is power.
Where eternal distances cross is concentration; because
crossing is concentration.
Where concentration exists is something.
Matter is something; and something is always a com-
bination of one negative neutralizing another negative.
Every negative by itself only is nothing.
Space by itself is nothing.
Time by itself is nothing.
(For wo-time by itself and Mo-space by itself would be
equal to wo-nothing or something which being a positive,
proves that Time and Space are negatives.)
In the way of comparison we therefore can say with
the Bible (because "Truth" or "Super-Truth" stands above
all negatives):
Figuratively, God (or Truth by Itself) created some-
thing out of nothing.
16


Of course the beginningless and the endless cannot be
created in reality, but we can imagine how the word "Crea-
tor" happened to be formed in the minds of thousands of
millions of people who in a body were seeking the Truth.
We see:
First: that the super-existence of the inevitable Super-
Truth, called God, is self-evident and supernatural: because
Truth caused (without a beginning) power and matter or
"Nature," which is endless on account of being beginning-
less. In other words, we see:
Super-Truth or God is supernatural because of stand-
ing above Nature, being independent of the same.
Second: that the existence of two negatives or Noth-
ing is inevitable.
Third: that the crossing of one negative (Space) with
another negative (Time) is Something with Power (be-
cause ETERNAL crossing IS Power), and also inevitable.
It is a mistake to suppose that Time is changeable.
Time never was, nor is, subject to change in reality, for
we are only gliding along the so-called road of Time.
The so-called road of Time itself is self-evidently with-
out beginning, without end, without change of Self, conse-
quently ETERNITY.
Space, like Time, can apparently be divided, but as this
so-called division can be begun at any place and everywhere
and at any time, there is in reality no division; consequently
Space and Time can be tilled out but not divided in reality,
that is to say, not materially.
That Time in the abstract, or by Itself, is "Nothing"
needs no argument.
That Space in the abstract or by itself also is "Noth-
ing" (the same as Time) is proven by the fact that if it
were "Something," something else could not fill it out; for
it is a known fact that two matters, or objects, or bodies
17


cannot occupy the same space; and if space by itself, with-
out crossing, were something, or material, it would occupy
itself, and could not be filled with ether, air, gas, etc.
Time and Space can be filled out, but cannot be pushed
aside, because both are "Nothing" by themselves. To deny
that Time and Space are negatives would be equal to deny-
ing that Matter is a positive. I see nothing of nothing "will
always remain," "I see something."
Where is the eternal matter-source?
The eternal invisible matter-source exists everywhere
where the distances cross, and as the eternal distances
cross each other everywhere, there is matter everywhere,
whether invisible or visible.
Why?
Because (as mentioned before) the existence of matter
"everywhere" in Nature, proved, that eternal crossing and
concentration of distances are that Something, called:
POWER and MATTER,
Which two combined, produce beginningless as well
as endless motion and
"LIFE"
in unconscious and conscious form.
"Life" is power and matter in a concentration-point or
focus—a focus which is absorbing or pulling (that is to say
attracting) and digesting (or pushing).
Life is "mechanical" and "automatic-action," derived
from self-evident beginningless universal gravitation and
centrifugal motion, which constitutes a "Being" or "a plant,"
etc., as long as no decay takes place.
But where does that motion come from? Where did
motion start and when?
Motion always was and is everywhere.
Why?
Because power and matter have eternal contraction and
eternal expansion in themselves:
18


Why?
Because eternal crossing (as mentioned before) is eter-
nal concentration; eternal concentration is eternal central-
condension; eternal condension is eternal contraction; eternal
contraction is eternal MOTION.
Where does eternal expansion come from?
From eternal motion.
Why?
Because eternal motion causes eternal friction; eternal
friction causes eternal warmth; and eternal warmth causes
eternal expansion; therefore (as will be proved later on)
there always existed gaseous, liquid and white-hot matter.
Contraction and expansion, whether following each
other in slow or quick succession, are vibrations.
These vibrations often follow each other so quickly
that the vibrating object does not seem to vibrate at all.
Like warmth, cold exists through friction, and there-
fore there always is a certain degree of heat, even in cold,
though that may seem incredulous; but the friction is so
small that the opposite of great friction (cold) takes place.
The (almost) most intense opposite of heat is liquid
air, which is many degrees colder than ice; in fact, so cold
that ice can make liquid air boil, because ice is boiling-hot in
comparison to liquid air. Even in hundreds of degrees of
cold below the temperature of liquid air is heat on account
of friction.
The contraction, expansion and warmth (including
congealing) we find nowhere more pronounced than in the
material quintessence of the Universe called:
THE HEART.
The motion and warmth of the Heart are a part of that
motion and the warmth which existed eternally.
19


Not only the heart, but man in general is a combination
of contraction and expansion.
When heat is superheated by friction, a property of a
higher state of motion exists:
LIGHT!
But Light is not the heat itself; it is a property of heat.
When the friction is so small that no instrument can
detect heat, Light is called: Light without heat, although
in reality some heat must be there; for there can be no light
without friction, and no friction without heat.
Just the same as Light is the property of a higher state
of motion.
The highest property of the highest quality of motion is
THOUGHT!
But just as light cannot exist without matter,
Thought cannot exist without brain.
There can be no motion without matter; and although
thought is not matter (because thought is the concentrated
capacity of vibration), and although that capacity itself is
not the matter itself (because vibration is a property of mat-
ter, and therefore self-evidently non-material):
No vibration and its capacity can exist without matter;
and it is all the same, whether that matter is visible or in-
visible.
What is
"SOUL?"
First of all we must bear in mind that Soul is not
thought, although there can be soul in thought.
"SouV (notwithstanding several phantastic theories)
is the ethereal vibration in the Universe, and part of all vi-
bration is focused in the heart. Therefore, "the Soul" in
a human being is "the ethereal vibration in the heart," the


current of which thrills the particles of every drop of blood,
of every nerve, of every fibre, of every brain-cell; in fact,
every particle in the body; and the feelings and sympathetic
vibrations and actions will be warmer or colder in relation to
the warmth of the heart, and in relation to the inborn sensi-
tiveness of the normal brain and nerve centres, by which the
Soul becomes conscious.
By the assistance of brain-motion, SOUL (in man or
beast) IS CONSCIOUS; without it the Soul is dormant.
IS THE SOUL IMMORTAL?
Yes, Soul always was and always will be immortal; for
the ethereal vibration in the Universe is unborn and undying
whether becoming conscious through the brain or not.
Soul is in Life (which is mechanical focus or concen-
tration-point of motion) and Life is immortal; because what
we call
"DEATH,"
is only a chemical change, or displacing, or unfocusing of
matter particles; the latter being the original, eternal power
and matter particles, which commence to refocus immedi-
ately after death into different forms:
Ether, gaseous matters, air-germs, microbes, plant-in-
gredients, animal life ingredients, human life ingredients,
etc.
In case of embalming or other cause, the natural process
of unfocusing is retarded.
In case of cremation the natural process of unfocusing
is interrupted, and the dissolving process is forcibly hast-
ened.
The particles which change into ether, smoke, or hot
air, soon dissolve into cold air; the particles which change
into ashes remain (whether scattered or not), during thou-
sands of years apparently in the same state, although time
cannot but change them into an invisible mass in the end.


And even then there never is, was nor can be rest in
matter; for every matter-particle is motion, or power and
matter from eternity; consequently:
Soul (whether unfocused or not) is immortal, because
soul vibrations are not only in life, but also in death; and
life although unfocused, and notwithstanding that we call it
"death" in that case, is life all the same; even when it is
scattered and exists only in the form of a white-hot mass
with the power of eternity (which is also indestructible in
every particle of matter), life it w (although unfocused,
and therefore not feeling, not grasping itself). It remains
life because that white-hot mass contains all the elements
necessary to form life in concentrated state.
For that reason:
WE ETERNALLY WERE
and
ETERNALLY WILL BE
either scattered or focused in different forms of matter-
combinations.
Do we lose consciousness after Death?
Yes, self-evidently, because the brain-particles (which
produce consciousness if connected in the form of cells) are
chemically displaced, in consequence of the eternal power,
by which the cells, on account of duconnecting-motion dis-
appear, and by which the matter-particles concentrate in en-
tirely different ways; in other words:
In Death (as mentioned above)
We are,—I am scattered.
What is SPIRIT?
Spirit is the non-material quintessence of the Universe,
in one word: "Thought;" (not to be confused with so-
called spiritual apparition).
Thought being a property of brain-motion, this brain-
motion self-evidently also ends after death, but the effects
of the acts produced during lifetime through that brain live
on and on, and develop either good or bad effects, or both,
during the present and during the future ages.
23


Then there can be no such thing as spirit-communica-
tion from the dead?
No, for the so-called spirit-conversations or communi-
cations (preceded by so-called twitches, so-called electric
shocks, drowsiness, and also effected by magician tricks, like
slate-writing, gold-writing, the passing of solid matter
through solid matter, etc., etc., and so-called refined and se-
lected language), are always deception.
And even then, when supersensitiveness of a brain ex-
ists in reality, the words spoken or secrets divulged are,
after all, nothing but the effects of the so-called brain phono-
graph, or thought vibration-reproducer; in other words:
brain impressions or inherited indentations, transferred and
repeating themselves.
To be still more explicit:
Impressions made (on a supersensitive brain) by the
vibrations or thoughts of another brain were in that case re-
tained; and the impressions made on the supersensitive
brain, repeated thought-vibrations (received from another
brain, either during the present, or days, weeks, months or
years ago), by making the ether vibrate, although in conse-
quence of unavoidable counteraction these thought-vibrations
are never exactly alike.
With what can we compare "Telepathy," or thought-
transference (which exists apart from coincidences)?
With telegraphy; telepathy is mental telegraphy.
The ether all through the Universe is to the brain and
wireless telegraphy what the copper wire is to the usual
telegraphic instruments. Thought, or brain vibrations are
transmitted by the ether-vibrations; and so is sound trans-
mitted to the phonograph by the indentations made through
air-vibrations which were transmitted and repeated. (Why
telepathy is possible will become more clear after the exist-
ence of an ethereal body has been explained.)
The body can transplant peculiar brain-properties as
well as other properties.
23


It also can transplant retained brain-impressions or
memory (although dormant), from one brain to the super-
sensitive brain of another.
Brain-properties (including special indentations which
are liable to revibration), often are transplanted from gen-
eration to generation by marriage, consequently inherited
by others.
Therefore, thoughts (from persons long ago dead)
which caused impressions on another supersensitive brain
(living in that same age) can. under favorable (though ab-
normal) conditions, suddenly be repeated.
Even after skipping many generations these pent-in or
boxed-up impressions (transplanted from generation to gen-
eration) can suddenly ivake up by recommencing to vi-
brate, after the nerve centres are affected; this phenomenon
also accounts for some apparently incomprehensible actions
and accomplishments (like talking, for instance, in a lan-
guage totally foreign to a person when being in a hypnotic
state). All these mechanical actions are simply inherited
revibrating-brain-indentations.
Self-evidently the brain (and its consciousness) of the
person who caused the impressions on the supersensitive
brain (by thinking, or even talking to himself) was dis-
solved long ago, and changed into all kinds of matter, whirl-
ing on and on through the Universe for billions of years to
come.
How is it possible that prophecies can be made?
By feeling the inevitable following vibrations (or
effects of causes), in advance, or by signs which experience
taught us are advance-agents of the events to follow.
How is it possible that there are persons who can actual-
ly see events which are happening (at the same moment)
many hundreds or even thousands of miles away?
24


By sympathetic brain-vibrations between two or more
brains (which we may call thought-telegraphic instruments),
with the ether as leading substance or so-called wire between
those brains.
Of course, all these eccentric brain-motions are abnor-
mal, although quite natural.
To return once more to the apparently direct conversa-
tions and communications from the spirits: The only good
word one can say in favor of the deception is that thousands
receive consolation by being duped, intentionally or unin-
tentionally. In the latter case the brain of the person who
apparently deceives is diseased or has too much imagination
and suffers from hallucinations, etc.
That in some countries there exist spies who keep the
professional mediums all through the country posted on all
kinds of information, etc., regarding thousands of families,
will probably be denied, and not believed by many; for when
people want to talk with their beloved dead (and believe such
a thing to be possible) they sooner prefer deception and im-
agination at any price than the inevitable truth.
True mesmerism, hypnotism, like telepathy, and clair-
voyance are self-evident facts produced by affecting the
nerve-centres; facts acknowledged by the highest authorities
in scientific and medical circles.
What proof is there that spirit communication always
is either deception or imagination?
The proof is:
First: That spirit communication is thought;
Second: That thought is focused brain motion;
Third: That focused brain-motion cannot exist with-
out matter;
Fourth: That brain-motion cannot be communicated to
other brain-matter (which in turn also vibrates) without
coming from brain-matter;
25


Fifth: That brain-matter is either scattered or slowly
dissolving or unfocused after death.
Sixth: That consequently no focus-connection in the
form of "I" or "We" can exist: and therefore our individ-
uality, our consciousness passed away.
And what further proof is there?
The following is still more convincing: When a per-
son is unconscious he is temporarily dead to his individuality
because the brain is stunned. However, in case the brain
and nerve-centres are not only stunned, but gradually fall-
ing apart or decaying, the "I" self-evidently is destroyed, by
which the original consciousness is consequently lost. Where
there is no consciousness nor dormant-consciousness, con-
sciousness cannot "wake up" "nor continue," although the
impressions made by that former consciousness on other
brains can continue to exist for ages to come. (See Jas-
trow's "Fact and Fable in Psychology" for exhaustive analy-
sis regarding deception in Spiritualism, page 137)*
But has it not been proven by apparitions of persons
(who even talk to other persons at the same time when they
were dying thousands of miles away) that there was con-
scious life in the departed self?
To this question the following answer is a natural se-
quence:
First of all: The vision of a certain brother, for in-
stance, who appeared to his sister (the latter is personally
known to the author), who saw his face distinctly looking
at her through the shutters at the same moment that he was
dying miles away, this vision produced by sympathetic vibra-
tion, appeared or rather was visible only to the brain of his
sister, for her husband, to whom she called the attention of
this apparition, saw nothing.
Second: Those visions or sympathetic vibrations often
occur, but always at the moment when another person has
that dying person very strongly in mind and transfers the
brain image during or after the death of the deceased to
somebody else through telepathy.
* Published by Houghton, Mifflin & Co., Boston and New York.
26


Third: It is absolutely absurd to believe that one can
talk in the street with the same person (this was related to
have happened in London, Eng.) at the same time that that
person was dying miles away (in Italy); for the clothes,
for instance, would have to be an entirely different suit of
clothes from the clothes that this very same person wore
while being in another city.
Fourth: It often happens, in consequence of the har-
monious vibrations in the Universe, that one sees a person
who looks so much like the person one has in mind that
more than once mistaken identity takes place; and often one
sees the very person one has in mind almost right after the
one who was some one else in reality. No doubt more than
once the real person with whom one is well acquainted, even
though not being in the same city, passed through one's
mind unconsciously, at the same time almost as ope saw the
wrong person.
It also is a well-known fact that very often (in fact,
most of the time) the wrong person greatly enjoys the mis-
take, and by humoring the conversation leaves the one who
made the mistake under the impression that he met the right
person; consequently the one who was fooled could not be
accused even of swearing falsely that he had talked to the
person who was miles away.
How is
"CONSCIOUSNESS"
possible?
Before we arrive at the answer to that question our
thoughts have a long road to travel yet; and we therefore
must first return to the development of power and matter.
Self-evidently if there were not "two main-nega-
tives" there would be no beginningless nor endless "dis-
tances;" and if there were distances without crossing each
other eternally (which of course is an impossibility), there
would be no power and no matter. No eternal crossing of
Eternal Distances would be equal to:
27


No strength or power;
No condension or matter;
No eternal motion;
but since the eternal crossing is inevitable, because the two
main-negatives existed eternally, which means that they al-
ways existed simultaneously—and also because Eternal and
endless Distances are.consequently in all directions—we ar-
rive at the self-evident conclusion and conviction (which
Nature proves to be the Fact):
That the Eternal mutual neutralization between Time
and Space, consisting of "Eternal Crossing of Distances"
is equal to:
(A) "Strength or Power-"
(B) "Eternal Condensed Distance or Matter-"
both (A and B) being eternally united, we see that the self-
evident consequence is:
BEGINNINGLESS AND ENDLESS
"MOTION."
Consequently "Motion" is equal: to the beginningless com-
bination of Power and Matter.
All matter or eternal condension is self-evidently ro-
tating.
Why?
Because (as mentioned before) Motion causes friction,
and friction causes
"ROTATION."
The more matter rotates, the more it will condense or
concentrate, until finally it becomes visible, and gradually
more solid.
Of the invisible thinnest matter there always was, is
and always will be self-evidently an inexhaustible and end-
less abundance.
In consequence of the eternal condension and rotation,
the invisible matter changed and changes into visible, white-
hot, gas-like congealing balls, called
"SUNS."
28


On account of the eternal inevitable motion every sun
is turning around its axis and revolving around the next
larger sun.
These fire-balls, or suns, swing either immense drops
of fire or contracting spirals and rings from themselves, on
account of the centrifugal force which is caused by rotation.
Although those smaller monster-drops, or balls, are at
first small suns themselves, and cannot but revolve around
the larger balls, they self-evidently cool off gradually; an
outer crust is formed and gradually their own light (on the
outside) is lost.
After nearly all their inside-light also is gone, in other
words, after nearly all the fire that was left (inside) found
its way by bursting through the outside-crust, the whole ball
is a well-nigh burned-out mass, like our moon, not fit for
much vegetation, much less for human beings, because most
of the necessary inside warmth was chemically changed and
found its way into the outside space.
(NOTE: Investigations by Prof. W. H. Pickering, of
Harvard College, Cambridge, Mass., have proved that there
exists some kind of atmospheric condition on the moon by
which vegetation near its craters is possible.)
Considering that a small white-hot object cools off
much sooner than a larger one, it is obvious that also the
earth is dark already (the outside at least), although illumi-
nated by the Sun.
As far as the sun is concerned—being far more than
1,000,000 times larger than our earth,—it will take millions
of years yet before a hard crust forms itself through the
cooling process, especially since continually swarms of small
fragments of rocks from many worlds (meteorites) drop
into the Sun, cause heat through enormous friction and are
melted into a white-hot mass, by which the cooling process
is greatly retarded.
29


For the present the Sun has a comparatively soft crust,
the presence of which is proven by telescopic investigations.
The comparative softness of that crust is proven by its
small density. But the Sun being a globe perforated with
craters is constantly enveloped with a well-nigh inexhausti-
ble mass of fire, which prevents the existence of vegetation
and animals, as well as human life, notwithstanding so-
called scientific and sentimental deductions.
Even if the Sun should be a solid dark body surrounded
by electricity (in consequence of friction) it first had to be
a ball of fire before becoming a solid mass.
The worlds which still shine with their own light (with
their own outside fire) we call fixed stars or Suns; the small-
er worlds which revolve around them (and not shining with
their own light) we call planets.
If any planet does not rotate around its axis in the
same direction as the Sun (like Uranus and Neptune, for in-
stance), it is proof that such a body (although thrown into
the Sun's current) was not thrown off by the Sun, but by
another Sun which had to come in collision with still another
Sun to reverse its diurnal motion at the time of universal
world-formation.
It has been found that all Suns and planets never have
the same density. The reason for this cannot be but the mu-
tual attraction of all bodies by which the particles of matter
are more or less drawn apart and by which at the same time
the contraction is retarded.
To deny that universal formation did not begin (in a
certain sense) in a white heat is against reason, because the
heat generated above the surface of worlds is secondary, and
the intense heat under a more or less thin or thick outer-crust
is "the original white-heat."
To deny that heat cannot come from the Sun through
more than 450 degrees of cold (or ether in space) is also
30


against reason because the heat, although scattered above an
atmosphere, is focused and partly condensed again.
Although space (the endless space) has no special cen-
tre in reality,—because any place in endless space would be
a centre,—there self-evidently is one Sun (the largest Sun)
of inconceivable (though limited) dimensions, which, before
contracting into a fire ball (from which other fire balls were
swung), was part of an endless mass of matter; in other
words, part of a mass of matter without outline or border,
of which it became the centre. In consequence of the eternal
rotation, part of that mass became self-evidently gradually
more dense, and commenced to part within itself, by which
the matter was divided into rotating spirals, rings and balls,
surrounded everywhere by an endless mass of the thinnest
matter.
Why was that mass divided in the form of rotating
spirals, rings and balls?
Because the rotation self-evidently could not but cause
those forms, although in some instances these forms are
somewhat elongated on account of the tremendous force by
which they were thrown.
The largest of those millions and millions of fire balls
(with still endless space and endless invisible matter around
it) became evidently the centre of those smaller balls; those
smaller balls became the centres of still smaller balls; those
smaller balls became the centres of still smaller balls, until
the crust of some balls hardened, by which the dropping of
still smaller balls, or monster-drops, into space, discontinued
in some parts of the Universe.
Consequently we learn that around the Central-Sun
many other suns revolve; around these suns many other suns
revolve; around these suns many planets revolve; and around
those suns and planets, comets (or so-called meteoric-dust,
illuminated by the suns) and many meteorites or fragments
of crusts (rock) revolve in swarms, part of which some-
31


times melts by friction against the atmosphere, and which
we call "falling stars."
The Central-Sun self-evidently revolves around its own
axis, but cannot revolve in a circle, because there is no other
sun to revolve around or cause eccentric motion.
Is there consequently, after all, "A Centre" of the Uni-
verse?
Yes, and on the size of the largest ball depends which
place in space shall be the centre of matter.
But why does the place of the centre depend upon the
size of the largest ball?
Because the largest ball has the most power, and a cen-
tre is always there where there is the most power; conse-
quently the largest ball will be the centre of all the small
and subordinate balls.
Why has the largest ball more power than the smaller
one, and what is that power?
That power is the power of attraction, called "GRAVI-
TATION" (the details of gravitation will be explained later
on).
For many years people believed that the Sun did not
move through space, but it has long since been proven that
the Solar-system (a solar-system is a sun and planet revolv-
ing around it) moves as one whole through space—whith-
er?
Around a much larger sun, of course; and the self-evi-
dence also points to the fact that all solar-systems and known
disconnected systems combined move as one whole around
one Central-Sun, although the so-called two halves of the
known Universe move in different directions around that
sun just like the earth and Uranus as well as Neptune
move in opposite directions around our sun.
32


Although many irregular motions in individual stars or
suns and systems apparently totally neutralize the idea of a
Central-Sun's existence,—
What is an irregular, either curved or straight, motion
of millions of miles, and of thousands or millions of years'
duration, in comparison to its distance from the Central-
Sun?
It is like the distance of a one-thousandth part of an
inch compared to a distance many miles long; it is like a
bee moving in puzzling curved and straight lines away—
far away from its queen and yet circling around her.
Why do the worlds mostly not collide—why do the
worlds remain at equal distances from each other (apparent-
ly at least)?
The reason why the worlds do not collide (at least not
for billions of years) is that the rotation and centrifugal
force swung the smaller balls or monster-drops with enor-
mous force from the larger balls and keeps the smaller
ones at a distance; but gradually the smaller balls (although
for a time they may recede) are drawn into the whirl-cur-
rent of the larger balls, because those vibrations (this cur-
rent) sets the invisible particles of matter (between the
worlds) in whirl-motion, which, in turn, draws the planets
to their suns, although comparatively almost imperceptibly.
This universal attraction also is (in some instances) so
imperceptible, in fact, that it may take hundreds of years be-
fore one world is only a few inches nearer to its Centre-
World.
Thus the general absorption will take billions and bil-
lions of billions of years.
Still, what are billions and billions of years in compari-
son to Eternity?
A number as long as the distance from the Earth to
the Sun would not express Eternity;
Even that number, millions of miles long, would be less
than a drop in the ocean in comparison to Eternity!
33


But why does it take so long before the planets are
finally totally attracted or absorbed by their suns?
Because the currents of other suns prevent the planets
from being influenced by their own suns only. As men-
tioned before: Gravitation keeps many worlds during bil-
lions and billions of years at an almost equal distance from
each other, and the same power consequently prevents that
one world absorbs the other in a short time.
And what is gravitation?
Gravitation is Universal attraction, (called: positive
current) caused by rotation or whirl-force which causes at
the same time centrifugal force or repulsion (called: nega-
tive current). This Universal attracting and pushing cur-
rent is to be found all through the Universe, and:
Continued in all particles of matter;
(Consequently also in the matter-particles of which man
and beast consist, by which thousands of their acts explain
themselves.)
No pushing can exist without being connected in some
way with previous rotation. The matter called radium pos-
sesses both qualities to a high degree.
(Radium, which was discovered after almost unsur-
mountable obstacles by the French chemists Monsieur and
Madame Curie (especially the latter), apparently upsets
several well-known natural laws by its seemingly undimin-
ished activity and quantity. Like a sponge in the ocean,
which always holds and rejects the same quantity of water,
radium in the endless ocean of space, which is filled with un-
condensed radiating matter, apparently never gives out; but
after millions of years a microscopical difference in size and
consequently also inactivity will exist; still what are even
millions of years in comparison to eternity? Nothing but a
drop in an endless ocean; and: even radium dissolves.
(Of course, should the earth come in contact with the
sun, radium would dissolve immediately in still thinner mat-
ter in consequence of the enormous friction and heat.)
34


The HIGHEST quality (the highest material and also
spiritual qualities) of attraction is bodily and spiritual
"TRUE LOVE,"
and
The highest material and spiritual qualities of repul-
sion is bodily and spiritual
'INTENSE HATE."
BOTH are: the continuation of the original vibrations
produced by the eternal attracting and repulsing force all
through the Universe, of which we are part. Both are con-
scious gravitation and repulsion.
(We also find this law of gravitation, including attrac-
tion and repulsion, in vice and virtue, or: attracting vice and
repulsing the same, attracting virtue and repulsing the same.)
In fact, all pure and impure passions are but continua-
tions of different qualities of attracting and repulsing vibra-
tions all through the Universe, which have to be held in
check by will-power or conscious balance.
Without balance we are nothing but wild beasts, and
worse, because we have so much more reasoning-power.
(What will-power and reasoning-power is will be explained
later on.)
However, to return to the general absorption in conse-
quence of gravitation:
On account of the stronger rotating or whirl-currents
in the larger bodies (even though smaller bodies may con-
tinue to recede for a time), all the larger bodies will grad-
ually absorb the smaller ones, and after billions and again
billions of years, self-evidently only one endless mass (sur-
rounded by eternal space) will exist, which gradually re-
turns to its former state, namely:
Only power and shapeless-invisible and visible matter,
(the latter white-hot in consequence of eternal enormous
friction), motion (consequently formation), re-formation.
35


A new (self-evidently automatic) so-called forming
Creation, sprouting from the last dissolved Creation or rather
Formation—
The way it always was,
The way it always will be!
Thus we see:
That our Present Universal Formation, or so-called
"Creation" (of which we are part), sprouted from the dis-
solved Universe which existed before the present Uni-
verse EXISTED IN ITS PRESENT FORM.
Is it not possible that a better Universe and conse-
quences will follow a previous Universe?
No. Why not?
Because the first cause being unchangeable, self-evidently
cannot but cause exactly the same effects.
Besides: Humanity is constantly nearing a better life,
and has not yet attained its zenith of righteousness, yet is
slowly on the way to complete the circular road which leads
to perfection.
Now let us go back a few moments, enter into some de-
tails and get a glimpse of the solar system:
1 Our Sun is the centre of the (so far known) planets,
called: Mercurius, Venus, Earth, Mars, Vesta, Juno, Ceres,
Pallas, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and almost two
hundred planetoids or asteroids (smaller planets).
The Sun has a Halo or light substance around itself,
called: "Corona." This Corona is partly in gas form, and
not white-hot (which has been proven by an instrument
called: spectroscope). The rays of the Sun penetrating the
Corona lose some of their heat thereby.
The Earth revolves around the Sun, but in consequence
of being in a peculiar current of the Sun's centrifugal force,
her circular road does not form a perfect circle. Besides
turning on its axis, the Earth describes a chain of half-cir-
36


cles. These half-circles form an elongated circular, or'oval-
chain around the Sun.
Just the same as our Earth has one visible subordinate
planet, or moon, several of the other planets also have one or
more visible moons.
Our moon revolves on its own axis on the average in
twenty-eight days, forty-three hours, eleven minutes, and
seven seconds; but it also revolves around the Earth in the
same space of time, and therefore we never see more than
one same half (consequently only one side) of the moon.
In a certain sense the moon does not turn at all around
the Earth, because, although it moves in a circle, or rather
elongated circle ellipse, (and so does the Earth), it acts like
a soldier pointing a rifle at another soldier, and another sol-
dier pointing a rifle at his enemy, both moving in circles;
but one of them remaining in the centre. In other words:
both soldiers eyeing each other, so that they never see each
other's backs.
Although the one in the centre (the Earth) also shows
her face only (to the moon), the principal (the Earth) is
constantly (as mentioned before) moving in an oval-orbit,
which forms a chain of half-circles besides.
For that reason it is possible for the moon to rotate
only once a month on its axis against the Earth turning on
the average thirty times on its axis, and yet turning only one
(entirely or partly visible) side or half of itself to the Earth.
The Moon (like the Earth) receives its light from the
Sun.
Calculations have proven that the light of the Sun
reaches us in eight minutes, although the distance from the
Sun to the Earth never is less than 91,000,000 miles.
37


Light consequently travels at the rate of about 700,-
000,000 miles an hour.
The light of the Moon reaches us in less than two sec-
onds.
But there are stars which are so far from us that it
takes the light years instead of seconds, minutes, hours,
days, weeks and months before it reaches our planet.
Consequently if a star should explode after that light
is on its way, we still will see that light and that line com-
bination of light or face of that star, just as many years as
it takes that light to reach us.
In other words:
If the moon should burst, we would see its present outlines
about two seconds yet, and the catastrophe itself about two
seconds later than when it took place; just the same as sound
travels (and reaches us) at the rate of 1125 feet a second,
which explains why (at a distance) we first see a workman
strike a tree, and long after the blow hear the same sound,
which others who (were directly near him) heard (appa-
rently) at once or one or two seconds sooner than we did.
Considering that the eternal crossing of distances ex-
ists, which fact is an inevitable power, this crossing must
self-evidently break through everywhere in consequence of
the eternal motion, which, as we know, contains friction,
rotation, attraction and repulsion, or pushing-power.
Therefore: crossing being the main power, self-evi-
dently the outlines of "THE CROSS" will appear in num-
berless combinations.
For the same reason "the crossing of the fingers,"
(folded hands) and the design of "The Cross" represent:
the strength of eternity. In fact: man, with side-ways out-
stretched arms forms a cross.
38


One will find everywhere: crossing (material) straight
lines, and also the effects of rotation: curved lines.
Besides: Everywhere the endless combination of ma-
terial crossings (straight lines) which curved lines is to
be seen.
Matter being everywhere, and the word everywhere
meaning the same as: in an "endless circle," or in an "end-
less square," or in an "endless oblong," or in an "endless
triangle," or in an "endless combination" of these distances
which turn into visible distances, it is self-evident that the
attraction and repulsion or pushing (in combination with
the intermediate, the endless intermediate circular or cen-
tral motion), forms itself, shapes itself (so-called creates),
unconsciously, into all kinds of absolutely inevitable line-
combinations or forms.
That those forms have forms or materialized distances
within themselves (and often so small that the eye cannot
detect them, not even with the strongest microscope) is
self-evident, because distance not only exists endlessly en-
larged, but also endlessly diminished; and just as it is impos-
sible to grasp endless distance in a broad sense, just the same
it is impossible to grasp the end of endless distance in a small
sense, because there is no end. And if one considers that
endless distance both ways is filled with matter (this being
inevitable), the idea of ever grasping those forms with the
mind, and following their motions either with the visible or
with the mental eye, is self-evident an impossibility; though
we knoxv that they exist, in other words: grasp the truth of
their existence.
The vibration of the original eternal crossing of dis-
tances is:
The unconscious Soul of the Universe.
This Soul is everywhere: it works its way through all
combinations of power and matter, because it is the vibra-
tion, the property of matter itself.
39


Remember always that soul itself or eternal vibration
is a property of matter, and not the matter itself; therefore
soul is now-material.
When all combinations of power and matter meet each
other, or focus, the ANIMAL and the higher animal
(MAN) are at last the result.
Man has in himself the power to be either a higher
being, a being free from depraving desires and actions, like
indulgence for instance, not founded on true, holy love, or
a being which sinks below the animal, or a being which vi-
brates like a pendulum today: (figuratively speaking) in the
clouds, tomorrow in the so-called lower region, or a being
which is almost perfectly well balanced, or a being which
has himself totally under control, the hardest to attain.
A being developing the highest degree of noble thoughts
and actions is:
"TRUTH PERSONIFIED."
Truth personified (which is higher than power and
matter only, because Truth, although understanding itself
with the help of Power and Matter, remains the cause oi
Power and Matter), is the same as:
TRUTH OR GOD {with consciousness) ALL
THROUGH THE UNIVERSE;
Therefore true mankind is:
TRUTH or HIS IMAGE with consciousness:
The highest attainable in the Universe!
How is it possible that such a focused combination of
attracting and repulsing matter and power as "man with
consciousness and reason" exists?
First, we have to go back to the root, or:
The Eternal Offspring of the
"Truth-Unit."
What is the root or eternal Offspring of Truth?
The "Three-in-one-FORM."
40


All through the Universe one will find a "Three-in-
one-FORM," which form was already observed by Plato, the
Greek Philosopher.
The Eternal Offspring of truth, or that which cannot be
divided is:
"A Three-in-one-FACT."
for:
Time is (figuratively speaking):
Mainform (I);
No Time or space is the contrast, or
Counter Form (II);
and
Something or the Union of both is the
Middle Form (III),
Containing in itself:
(I) and (II)
or the combination (of two negatives) which always forms
one positive.
Consequently the whole Universe rests on the number
3, and therefore 3 is the root of all progress, containing an
inexhaustible combination of moving, rotating, attracting,
pushing, visible and invisible, straight, curved and inter-
mediate lines.
The endless mass of ether which fills endless space,
(the different gaseous matters and the air) cannot be but a
combination of exceedingly small globes in consequence of
eternal rotation. When air appears in the form of fog, we
can see the globes; when those globes cohere they are con-
centrated air, or clouds; when those clouds concentrate there
is a mass of
"WATER."
When the outside of worlds has cooled off there exists
crust, rock, soil: there is
"LAND."
41


When the crossing and rotating lines cross under water
the developing centres will form combinations of moving
lines:
"FISH."
When a mass of lines is pushed and drawn or attracted
equally, self-evidently a flower-like star is the result. This
combination, this moving-combination of lines, contains
symmetrical straight and curved lines; symmetrical on ac-
count of equal pressure and attraction all through space.
This star-line combination is pushed and attracted or pressed
out and drawn out from the root, which (the root) is a
combination of lines containing self-evidently the same prop-
erty as the original crossing. From the root, (in conse-
quence of eternal rotation which contains attraction and at
the same time centrifugal force) a high (or long) (hollow-
stem) is pressed out and attracted, containing inside, as
well as outside, the concentrated motion, circle-form, and
combinations of lines. This we call FLOWER (the highest
state of plant life proper) after being fully drawn and
pushed out, and having expanded by the vibrations of the
sun-whirl and the warmth of the light. Thus there ex-
isted the formation of
"PLANTS."
The heart, which is the centre of human existence, is a
Universe by Itself.
It is a Universe on a small scale, containing intermedi-
ate vibrations of the endless materialized lines, as well as
the intermediate vibrations of the bordered materialized
lines and all line-combinations in the Universe on a reduced
scale. The heart gradually unfolds itself, being nourished
from without by the line-combinations which self-evidently
push against it and enter it on account of the internal mo-
tion; and being nourished from within by drawing in or
absorbing, on account of the presence of the force (or mo-
tion) of attraction.
42


The existence of apparently reasoned-out-designs, all
through the Universe and in the human body, is in reality
an inevitable combination of the inevitable root: 3;
Mainform, Counterform,
and
Middleform,
by which symmetry, circles and balls within circles and balls
(Eyes) drawing and pushing matter (Lungs, Muscles,
Hands, Legs, Stomach, etc.), air-absorbing matter (Skin)
sympathetic vibration-line combinations (Nerves, etc.) are
bound to crop out.
On account of the eternal Three-in-one root, (its effects,
its causes again, and the effects of those causes again, etc.)
condensed counterparts of the absorbing and unloading, at-
tracting and pushing or repulsing-force process (through
the whole Universe), break through everywhere in endless
forms.
Thus the above-mentioned condensed counterpart or
the existence of
"THE INSECT," "THE BIRD," THE ANIMAL"
and the higher animal called "THE HUMAN BEING,"
(all with thinking capacity) was inevitable.
The sun-rays, being triangular in form (which is a
self-evident form), are continued in endless triangular and
also three curved or three-circular forms.
The elongated circle, or oval or egg-shape-current of
the Earth is reproduced and continued in the oval-form of
an "Egg;" and the inside hollow space within the shell will
be found to be a visible counterpart of the imaginary straight
line behind which the so-called empty focus exists (in the
oval-road of the Earth around the sun). (Note: See
illustrated explanation about this empty focus in New-
comb's "Popular Astronomy," page 69.)
In fact, more and more it will be found that all the
currents and so-called designs of self-evident motions com-
* Published by Harper & Bros., New York.
43


bined in the motions of the stars, are continued and focused
or united in the body of man, in all acts (including the acts
of instinct) ; in fact, in all organic as well as inorganic life
and matter.
All line-combinations and currents contained in the,
solar-system are reproduced and continued in man, etc. It
will be found that the distances between the vital organs
and the head correspond with the relative distances between
the planet-orbits and the Sun, which proves, for instance,
that male and female exist on account of the line-combina-
tions and currents of Saturn.
Therefore, Forces, Lines and Forms, also break through
in the Sciences and Arts, produced by assistance of the
brain.
But the reason why it is impossible and useless as well
as senseless and brain-racking, to try the unraveling of the
endless combinations of Nature, is: that self-evidently every
main form has again a counter form and middle-form, etc.,
which formation goes on and on through billions and bil-
lions of years, without end, not only within endless space
on a small scale, but also within endless space on a large
scale.
The following will illustrate more fully the "Three-in-
one-formation," or III-I-root:
For instance say:
Blue is main form (I);
Yellow is counter form (II);
both united are:
Green or middleform (III);
Consequently Green is One by itself; but as it is the
combination of Blue and Yellow, or two other different
colors, there are in reality three (colors) in One.
44


Just the same as Blue has Yellow for counterform (or
contrast),
Green has Red for counterform,
which two combined, form again a different color as middle-
form, etc., etc.
The same way: A complicated Mainform is this:
The inability to follow the endless now-materialistic and
endless materialistic combinations; (not possible to follow
because whether non-material or material the end of that
which has no end self-evidently can not be followed).
The above "Main-form" has a simple "Counterform"
which is the understanding why they exist (the endless
combinations) and whither they are going.
Both united:
"The impossibility to follow the endless combination,"
and
"The understanding why they exist, and whither they
are going" produce a
Middleform,
called:
"Spiritual Satisfaction,"
which completes the mental circle of truth.
The human "heart' (at first smaller than a needle
point) through which the existence of brain and body is
possible, cannot make its appearance on a world globe till
a globe is in a condition to produce or push out this power
and matter-combination.
Before we enter into details about "Consciousness" we
first have to answer another question. This question is:
Where do the colors come from?
Originally there is apparently no color; originally there
is either darkness or only white; but when the white ray is
broken by a piece of crystal in the form of a triangular
combination called prism, we find that white consists of
seven different colors.
45


Grass is not green, and has originally no color; noth-
ing has color, but grass has the property to attract and re-
flect the green color, or the blue and yellow rays combined,
by which grass appears to be green.
The same is the case with everything else that appears
to have the same color or combination of colors.
What has this color-question to do with consciousness
and reason?
It is only to be used as a comparison; for the brain is
to consciousness what the prism is to color.
For instance, originally there is (apparently at least)
no consciousness and reason possible; but
The eternal combination of Truth, Time, Space, Power,
and Matter, or Motion, (including attraction, repulsion, and
all non-material and material line-combinations), are as
one Whole (including immortality) focused in the heart.
This complicated combination which is vibrating uncon-
sciously through the heart is sympathetic and unsympathetic
vibration.
The "vibrations" of this combination or focus are
continued in the nerves, nerve-centres, and body.
These vibrations, this combination, these sympathetic
and unsympathetic vibrations are still unconscious as long
as they do not enter the brain, but when entering the brain,
this combination is broken through the brain and stands re-
vealed to itself. "This is consciousness." The current of
consciousness affects in turn the heart-beatings again, which
vibrations affect the whole body.
It further depends on the sensitiveness or quality of the
brain whether there is more or less reason.
In beings, without a heart, the heart is substituted by
a combination of lines which act on the consciousness-sub-
stance.
46


Self-evidently reasoning-power does not exsit in the
lowest beings to any great extent; but every being has in-
stinct.
What is the difference between reason and instinct?
And what is instinct?
To answer that question we have first to remember that
more or less similar vibrations are sympathetic vibrations;
that sympathetic vibrations cause whirl-motion in the Uni-
versal currents; that circular and spiral motions are pulling
and pushing currents. Every pulling or pushing motion of
its kind is a certain cause by itself; the effects of this cause
will occur over and over again as long as the certain cause
is the same and repeats itself. Just as that certain cause
was the effect of a previous cause, just the same the effect
of that certain cause is again the cause of the next follow-
ing effect and so on without end. All mechanical causes
and effects will be the same every time, when the same cause
is the foundation; consequently the same motion in matter,
whether accomplished by unconsciousness or consciousness,
will be repeated without end; in fact, these mechanical mo-
tions "push the will" "to will" it. If these motions are ef-
fects, not prompted by consciousness, although accompanied
by consciousness, they are "instinct."
But premeditated motions, or motions prompted by con-
sciousness, are "reason."
When a certain kind of caterpillar feels the so-called
covering, or house building, motion coming on, this is in-
stinct. It is pushing power resulting from universal rota-
tion, and continued in the caterpillar body, by which the
pasty matter called silk thread is pushed out, a motion which
is instinctive progress.
He also feels that he cannot get out of his house or
cover unless he leaves an opening; and the feeling of re-
pulsion for certain insects who have the same feeling of re-
pulsion for him, makes him prevent them from entering, by
stopping it up, which is equal to self-evident resisting power,
caused by rotations of matter-particles in opposite direc-
tions. In case these repulsive feelings exist, the currents of
47


several unconscious whirl-motions of different and non-sym-
pathetic kind (un-sympathetic because there is too much
difference in the kind of vibrations), are repulsing each
other at a distance, through the medium of the ether with
which the whole Universe is filled. The repulsive effects
cannot be prevented, because the whirl-currents going in op-
posite direction cannot but repulse each other, whether ac-
companied by consciousness or not.
Now let us continue to further analyze what conscious-
ness and self-consciousness is:
CONSCIOUSNESS itself is:
Existence feeling that it lives; and self-consciousness
is:
Existence feeling with "self-understanding" with "self-
grasp" that it exists.
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS is:
The highest invisible quality of existence interlocked
with the highest visible quality of existence;
The vibrations of Self, vibrating in sympathy with
Self, and therefore grasping each other which is equal to
understanding each other.
What is the more definite explanation of REASON?
Reason or reasoning, (which of course includes self-
consciousness), in other words:
The power of deliberation, understanding, analysis, re-
production and creation or invention, is:
connecting or disconnecting at "Will" impressions made on
and formed by the brain.
And what is FREE WILL?
Free Will is the conscious, the grasping, the under-
standing, attracting and pushing power of choice.
Free Will either attracts or repulses, and by so doing
holds the balance between right and wrong.
48


We have the power of choice which we call "Free-
Will," (choosing or conscious pulling or attracting and
pushing or repulsing power). But our will-power, our
power of choice is limited; and its capacity dependent on
the condition and relation of our brain-cells to each other;
the condition of which in turn influence our acts, and these
free acts or acts of our choice are inevitable effects of in-
evitable causes, which themselves were effects of other in-
evitable causes, etc., without end. In other words: we are
free to act or choose for ourselves, in many instances; but
inevitable currents push and draw our brain-cells by which
they are affected, and in turn affect and limit the capacity
of the free-will or power of choice. Therefore, let us not
judge others too harshly, for: the inevitable and uncon-
scious struggle for supremacy between different currents
in the Universe on account of difference in vibrative quality,
is continued and reproduced on a smaller but all the same
terrible scale in living beings, by which often an unbalanced
conscious condition exists. The unconscious currents which
break through are unavoidable, and therefore often cause
acts, which though low or barbarous, could not be prevented
from taking place, otherwise they would not have occurred.
Why could they not have been prevented? Because there
was an overweight of currents with lower tendencies; if
this had not been the case, barbarous acts could not have
taken place. In other words: we have the power of choice
or free-will, but the kind of free-will and what we will
choose depends on the formation of previous currents.
A certain combination of currents will produce a well-
balanced being. When the different currents mostly neu-
tralize each other, in order words: when the inborn currents
with higher tendencies almost balance the inborn currents
with lower tendencies, a well-nigh perfect being is the result.
But those who are either born with a certain amount of weak
or abnormal brain-cells, or a partly faulty skull-formation,
or a condition of the blood, or any other reason, by which
most of the time non-balance exists, have a much harder
time to live correctly; in fact, to live against their inborn
inclinations, than those who without merit of their own are
49


held up as models of virtue. Only those who are born with
a larger amount of lower than higher tendencies, and yet
succeed to equal those (in behavior) who are born with a
larger amount of higher than lower tendencies, deserve ap-
preciation for their inborn struggle against unavoidable
circumstances.
Although there may be found excuses for some low and
barbarous acts, etc., these excuses would not justify the idea
to let the lawless element simply have full sway. Fault-
finding, punishment and prisons therefore are a necessity,
so as to prevent still greater harm, and check the lower cur-
rents as much as possible, which are after all the unpre-
ventable effects of unpreventable causes.
As far as "guilt" or "innocence" is concerned:
From the point of unavoidable self-evidence there is
neither "virtue" nor "sin," neither "right" nor "wrong,"
neither "total freedom" nor "natural cruelty," neither "mor-
ality" nor "licentiousness;" there is only: the continuation
of self-evident eternal cause and effect; there is only: the
continuation of universal current, for the existence of which
nobody is to blame.
But from the point of reason and morality there is total
free-will and either guilt or innocence, according to certain
previous conditions and events.
Still, we will do well to bear in mind that murder, for
instance, even when premeditated, is an act committed in
consequence of an abnormal relation of the brain-cells to
each other, and therefore should not be punishable with
death, although a life sentence is a necessity to prevent still
further harm. In fact, all incorrect actions will grow less,
the more we commence to understand the universal laws
which are continued in ourselves. Murder, for instance, is
the continuation (with consciousness in this case) of the
universal centrifugal or pushing power, just the same as
theft is a continuation of the universal attracting-power,
both of which are found in universal rotation.
What is balance in a correctly acting brain?
Balance is equal motion or equal drawing and pushing
on either two opposite sides or all sides, by which one mo-
50


tion neutralizes another, in consequence of which "Balance"
or "Rest" is the result.
Let us enlarge somewhat on "balance" and return once
more to a previous theme, the heart, brain and nerve-cen-
tres:
When a certain weight is attracted by gravitation and
pushed upward at the same time by a pressure equal to the
gravitation, those two opposites neutralize each other, of
course, and no weight whatever is the result, by which even
a weight of a million pounds will float in the air with more
ease than a feather, since the lightest feather has some
weight.
Still, this is only "matter," but when opposing vibra-
tions themselves (which, of course, are non-material, al-
though being a property of matter) cross each other inside
of the heart, when those vibrations themselves neutralize
and balance each other, "inner rest" self-evidently must be
the result.
This result is continued in the brain and nerve-centres
where this inner rest grasps itself, which is "conscious bal-
ance," and by which "spiritual" or "(conscious) divinity"
in man exists.
The conscious Will (or attracting and repulsing power
combined) also is three-fold.
First: The Will of the solid brain;
Second: The Will of the ethereal brain (soon to be
explained).
Third: The union of both, which is the "Rest" or
"Balance" referred to.
In case the ethereal brain and body go wrong, it is a
sign that the ethereal nerve-centres are partly mesmerized
by the current of the solid brain.
In case the solid brain and body go right, it is a sign
that the ethereal brain and body have the advantage over
the solid nerve-centres.
51


Balance of brain and body in man and beast (between
two contrasting beings) is the crossing of bridled or un-
bridled motion with bridled or unbridled motion, but
Balance of the spirit only is in conscious Truth alone,
which (the Truth) stands all by Itself, and which ever was,
ever is, and ever will be a Unit. Balance of the human
Spirit is Super-Truth's or the unconscious God's attracting
and repulsing-power, rendered conscious through and recog-
nized by the brain, as: "Will at rest."
Even animals, without knowing what Truth is (on ac-
count of their limited reasoning-capacity) have a limited
feeling of Truth, a limited feeling of Balance of Spirit, a
feeling of Super-Truth's or God's unconscious attracting and
repulsing-power made conscious by their brains by which
they also have a will.
But in nature (without brain) the so-called
"GOD'S WILL"
(so-called because in reality there is no will without con-
sciousness)
is
. - - Unconscious Rotating-Power,
which is
Whirl and centrifugal power combined,
which is
Attracting and repulsing-power combined,
which is
Drawing and pushing-power combined;
which combination is swaying through the Universe regard-
less of pleasing or displeasing consequences, because it does
not know, not understand nor grasp itself yet, being still
unbridled, still unfocused, still not SEVF-graspmg, still
unconscious.
52


THAT so-called WILL is
Super-Truth's power or the unconscious God-power;
generally called (erroneously):
"God's Benevolence or God's Wrath;"
(although it has nothing to do with mind).
What is the reason that we often do the wrong thing
just at the same moment when we are anxious to do right?
Because we have a dual existence, a double-self.
In fact:
"I (am)," "We (are)" the Union or Middleform of a
flesh-body and an ethereal-body. But the ethereal-body can-
not exist without the flesh-body because its existence is made
possible by the existence of the flesh-body, which also is
the cause of the dissolving of the ethereal brain at the same
time when the solid brain is dissolved.
How shall we understand this?
The explanation is simple: All through the Universe
is "Ether," or inconceivable thin matter. This matter is
so thin that it penetrates the smallest pores. It is a known
fact that glass or any other air-tight matter cannot be made
ether-tight.
(Crooke's Experiments have proven that an air-tight
glass globe is filled with ether, which in turn proves the ex-
istence of ether penetrating all pores.)
Just the same as glass, etc., is not ether-tight, the hu-
man body is not ether-tight; and as the body has millions
of invisible pores, besides the visible pores, it is totally pene-
trated and filled out with ether; and on the form of any
object or body depends the form of the ethereal-body.
Consequently whether a wooden object, etc., or a human
being, every object and body also has an ethereal form (ex-
actly like the solid form) within the form proper.
For that reason all organic and inorganic forms all
through the Universe are in direct connection with each
other which explains an endless number of phenomena, in-
cluding "Telepathy."
53


The human form being alive, and the ethereal form also
being a living form in consequence of the living form prop-
er, it is not hard to understand that we often act against
Truth at the same moment we want to act right. The ethe-
real brain thinks and the solid brain thinks, but since the
ethereal heart, brain and body (consisting of invisible mat-
ter) are infinitely thinner than air, and therefore possess
only the opposite, or spiritual, or refined desires of the solid
heart, brain and body (in consequence of subtle-currents)
it is self-evident and inevitable that the drawing and pushing
powers from without and from within between those two
different hearts, brains and bodies, make it exceedingly hard
to be a well-balanced being.
And what is the balance between those two hearts and
two brains combined which in turn affect the whole dual-
body?
"CONSCIENCE!"
And when is this conscience-current or are these con-
science vibrations disturbed?
When the solid brain, with which the ethereal brain is
interlocked, acts against the thoughts of the invisible brain;
and why is the visible brain compelled to think, to move,
to attract or to repulse just the same way as the invisible
brain, so as to insure a feeling of perfect balance or satis-
faction, or "Rest?"
Why are the thoughts of the invisible brain superior
to the thoughts of the visible brain?
Because invisible brain is still pure matter, entirely free
from any contamination, and therefore the "(material)
equal of (the non-material) Truth Itself;" although the lat-
ter remains the Main-Cause, and therefore the Super-force,
the parent-force, the force above power and matter; even
though it cannot surpass the purest material-quintessence
(the ethereal human brain) in quality.
In case the ethereal brain overworks itself, either by
toil or over-emotion, the solid brain feels the effects; and
when the solid brain-matter is in an abnormal condition, the
54


ethereal brain commences to lose its elasticity and normal
vibrations, which causes abnormal fixed ideas, hallucina-
tions, and queer actions through the agency of the solid
brain. However, so long as there is a spark of reasoning-
power left, and the solid brain not diseased, but only dis-
turbed by the irregular vibrations of the ethereal brain, so
long there is a chance to regain perfect mental balance.
How necessary it is that brain (the ethereal brain)
should not be overworked is proven by the following re-
markable capacity and sensitiveness.
A peculiarity of the invisible brain is that it works with
lightning rapidity and sometimes feels a Truth (a correct
answer) in the form of numbers or sound, or otherwise, al-
most immediately, without first having to analyze the prob-
lem and effect. If the weighty solid brain has partly enough
elasticity to follow the motions of the ethereal brain, so-
called lightning calculation (on the intuition order) and
intricate musical hearing are the result. But as it is abso-
lutely impossible for the solid and more or less clumsy brain
to critically follow the so much faster working process of a
so-much lighter or ethereal brain, it would be useless to at-
tempt the analysis of the succession of motions in that brain,
(consisting of mechanical effects, causes and again effects,
and so on), which follow each other so rapidly that the an-
swers or effects appear to be immediate.
Cannot the ethereal body continue to exist after death
or destruction?
No, because the connection of particles of the ethereal
body in the form of man, animal, bird, insect, plant or ob-
ject, is made possible by the millions of inevitable pores in
the visible form.
Consequently from the moment that any visible form
drops apart, the ethereal form also must gradually drop
apart and both (totally deadly-paralyzed) forms, dissolve
at the same time into disconnected particles, which are
drawn into the universal whirlpool out of which other com-
binations derive their existence.
55


Is there a PROVIDENCE?
Figuratively: Yes, because Providence (or that which
is foreseen, since the future effect has, so to say, been
provided for by the cause), is an inevitable combination
of vibrations.
If those vibrations are sympathetic and nearing or grad-
ually approaching or attracting each other, self-satisfying
results, that is to say, pleasing events will be the conse-
quence; and the self-evident and inevitable events could
have been or foretold if we had known in advance the
conditions which surrounded the vibrations.
When the vibrations are sympathetic and pleasing to
some brain, and particularly helpful at the right time, (al-
though at the same time either displeasing or distressing to
another brain), one will generally hear the following words
from the one who is pleased:
"This was Providence!"
and from the one who just escaped the same good luck
(which may be his ruin for life, and early death), we may
hear the words:
"God's Will be done!"
The one who was saved or helped in time happened to
be thrown (figuratively speaking) to the edge of the whirl-
pool of universal currents and escaped the centre.
The one who was ruined (by the other one being
saved), would have been saved, if the other one had been
drawn into the centre of the whirlpool. In other words, the
death of another sometimes saves the competitor from ruin
or comparative idleness, although the competitor may be
honorable enough not to wish for anyone's death.
This is only an illustration from practical life in many
cases.
In either case, Divine supernatural premeditation or
Divine supernatural consciousness, and a reasoned-out effect
coming from a personal God, is self-evidently out of the
question.
56


God, originally being unconscious pure Truth, could
(self-evidently) neither "will" nor "premeditate" the most
cruel events, nor the most holy feelings; both effects simply
being subject to the Inevitable. If this were not so a "per-
sonal God" would be "a multi-murderer," and "Man" his
holy instrument on account of carrying out his will.
DOES "DESTINY" EXIST?
Yes, for Destiny is that which, in consequence of self-
evident causes, must or is destined to happen.
"Destiny" is inevitable effect either caused by uncon-
scious rotating-power (which includes gravitation and
centrifugal ((pushing) force) or: will, (which of course
is conscious); (as mentioned before: without consciousness
there is no "will").
IS THERE DIVINE JUSTICE?
Yes, for Divine Justice is: that Super-Truth and every
cause shall have its self-evident and inevitable or perfect
EFFECT,
that every cause shall run its true course.
"Divine" means the highest; it means perfection.
"Divine" is higher than personality itself.
Whether the true course pleases or displeases a brain is
not the question.
It may displease one brain, it may please another.
Truth simply cannot but remain true to Itself for which
reason we call it Divine.
Therefore:
Since every cause cannot but have its self-evident and
inevitable effect, which is the unavoidable course of truth:
Inevitable atmospheric friction causing tremendous
electric explosions, or rotation causing hurricanes, torna-
does, and cyclones, inevitable evaporation and pressure in-
side of the Earth, causing earthquakes and tidal waves,
other conditions causing sickness, errors of animal and hu-
man brains, causing endless suffering to humanity.
57


Every cause must have its self-evident inevitable effect.
Such is the inevitable and self-evident straight unmade
and non-personal "Law of Truth" to which we have to sub-
mit with fortitude and a progressive spirit, although there
may be moments of overpowering emotions, which weaken
our power of resistance and in some cases totally wreck the
strongest brain.
Is there DIVINE PUNISHMENT?
Yes, (although not personal, of course); for Divine
punishment is:
A restless, or so-called burning conscience, (which is
a spiritual Hell), caused by the unchangeable self-evident
Law of Truth which is Divine in Itself.
Divine punishment is the knowledge that the effects of
all wrong acts will live for ages and ages; that those effects
cannot be prevented from working their evil influences; that
those effects may in time be effaced from the surface, but
that their under-currents will keep on and on to pollute an
almost endless number of persons.
Is there DIVINE RETRIBUTION, or so-called
DIVINE REWARD?
Yes (although not personal, of course); for Divine
Retribution is the cause of Truth in the form of freedom
from bodily as well as from spiritual suffering, and the bless-
ing to know (which is spiritual Heaven), that all the effects
of every good act will work their ways through ages and
ages; for: a good act (even if apparently lost) acts sooner
or later on another brain for the good, which in turn influ-
ences others, from generation to generation.
But is not the mental suffering so great at times that all
beautiful, reasonable, higher thoughts are almost an impossi-
bility, because the constant suffering in consequence of in-
justice, cruelty, oppression, slow starvation, years of bodily
suffering, or mental misery, or both, prevents the brain from
thinking rationally?
58


What is to be done in such cases? (when body and brain
are almost wrecked):
Nothing but to "take matters as they are." Nothing but
to submit to the "Inevitable," and trying to find some con-
solation in the thought that there are still hearts which (even
if they should be unknown to the sufferer), deeply feel with
one all unspeakable misery.
Has also the greatest sinner spiritual rest after death?
Self-evidently; because the chemical changes in power
and matter do not, can not change their inevitable course,
whether a brain acted right or wrong; and after all: "this
spiritual rest is counterbalanced by a spiritual Hell on
Earth."
For, even if the worst character showed a bold face till
the last minute, who knows what agonies he suffered at the
bottom of his heart, at the some moment, and during his life
of crime.
And why is there SIN (figuratively, "The Devil") in
the world?
Because it is self-evident.
Why?
Because its original existence could not be prevented.
Why not?
Because "Man" is a combination and continuation of
all the disturbing and undisturbed currents in Nature.
In Man,
the disturbing currents are:
"SICKNESS AND SIN;"
the undisturbed currents are:
"HEALTH AND VIRTUE;"
or the currents are mixed, and in that case there either
exists:
"Health and Sin"
or
"Sickness and Virtue."
59


How is it possible that tendencies (in the form of mo-
tions and traits of character) can be inherited, which were
hidden in a seed not larger than a pin's head?
The tendencies referred to in the form of virtues, sins,
habits, etc., are vibrations reproduced by matter which is
the offspring of focused-matter. That focused-matter is a
focus of focuses, and each focus has indentations made by
the vibrations of the parent, or relative focus. These in-
dentations or tendencies are retained in condensed form and
cause re-vibrations. The focus (which often contains thou-
sands of focuses, although occupying the space of a pin's
head only, or even less), unfolds or expands gradually, ab-
sorbs matter from without by which growth is possible and
finally stands revealed as a plant, a tree, an animal, a human
being, etc., with tendencies, that is to say, pent-up vibra-
tions, caused by indentations made by parent-vibrations.
How is it that people can be healed by FAITH, and
also partly can be released (in imagination, at least) of
their sins by the same agency?
What is FAITH?
FAITH is to trust, to believe that something is abso-
lutely sure, without being absolutely sUre, and yet having
implicit confidence.
In this case faith is: to have faith in the BIBLE, to be-
lieve in the Bible.
Belief is partly built on facts and partly "blind trust."
In some instances belief and praying are simply self-hypnot-
ism.
Belief in relics, Faith cure, etc., often performed, what
people call miracles, because they did not understand how
the effects were produced.
The explanation is not far to find, though; for faith
in cures, is in reality strong imagination.
Strong imagination influences the will-power; will-
power controls motion in many instances; will-power is a
most powerful current; an exceedingly strong current from
60


within is able to soften either gradually or almost instan-
taneously congestion, hardened substances or obstructions,
which caused lameness, deafness, blindness or other inflic-
tions. (There is, in fact, no use trying to discourage or
argue with those people who do not care for logic; if Faith
is their last straw in affliction, let them cling to it; especially
if their imagination or self-hypnotism cured them). So-
called "Christian Science," for instance, no doubt removed
many obstructions by self-hypnotism.
In regard to Faith, relieving people from their sins,
or at least making them better, everybody must know for
him or herself what appeals most to his or her feelings.
Whether it be Faith in the Scriptures to the letter, or
whether it be a free way of thinking,
As long as both ways lead to a better life in every re-
spect, it is totally immaterial how this progress of the spirit
be attained.
What does it matter?
An epitaph like this:
"Here rest the remains of a man who had Faith in the
Scriptures to the letter, and always was the soul of honor in
his actions."
or an epitaph like this:
"Here rest the remains of a man who was an Unbe-
liever, but always the soul of honor in his actions."
Both lived, after all, the same lives as far as honor was
concerned, and honor is that which we all should strive for,
without quarreling about personal opinions; besides: what-
ever these opinions may be,
Nobody with a rational brain can deny that THE BIBLE
is full of Majestic Thoughts, and Majestic Thoughts being
"conscious Truth," or "God with consciousness."
"The Bible will forever remain invaluable to Mankind."
For all barbaric exclamations contained therein are fully
61


overshadowed by the sermon on the mount alone, teaching
to live an honorable life and practice the noblest unselfish-
ness.
How can we keep the Balance, how can we remain in
possession of a quiet conscience?
By remaining true to our invisible self; in other words:
By actions as clean and pure as the purity of our ethe-
real heart,' brain and body, and Truth Itself.
In one Word, by
"DUTY!"
But how to act if we fail?
If we sometimes failed to act correctly (the author was
no exception), not stubbornness, but repentance is the great-
est power to lift us up and give us renewed strength to live
more correctly, to create happier surroundings, and conse-
quently to enjoy a quiet conscience.
Does this serious look on Life deprive us from enjoying
Life with a quiet conscience?
No, quite the reverse; for harmless fun and pleasant
times (excluding brutal, bloody sport) are a relaxation to
the spirit, a tonic to the tired-out brain; it makes one forget
the every-day routine of life, it refreshes every brain and
body, it makes the old feel young again.
But vulgar, so-called pleasures, leave (figuratively
speaking) nothing but ashes in the mouth, therefore:
Let us remain true to the dictations of our invisible
Self, which in turn acts on our visible heart and brain; for
the invisible Self is that self which has within its heart those
pure combinations of vibrations or currents, which form
in the brain that "still small voice" the vibrations of which
are felt by the ethereal brain and heard by the ethereal ear.
62


That Divine Voice (in other words, that ethereal con-
scious vibration) which dwells in the Divine Ethereal Body
is always right when normal; that voice is the voice of
Conscious Truth,
(Conscious through the medium of the brain and nerve-
centres. )
That voice, therefore, the voice which is conscious
truth, is
"GOD'S VOICE;"
and if you listen to it, it will make you remain true to
your better Self.
That better Self is:
"THE IMAGE OF GOD!"
for it is:
"The Image or counterpart of Truth in the form of
vibration of the visible and invisible body with conscious-
ness," THROUGH THE HUMAN BRAIN and NERVE-CENTRES.
No one ever listened with more reverence to that Voice
or conscious truth.
No one ever remained more true to His better Self than
THE "JESUS CHRIST'-BKLNG,
"The Very Image or counterpart of Truth or God" in
a personified state.
This personification of Truth caused, as we all know,
the existence of the Christian religion, which among other
things, re-enforces the old commandment:
"THOU SHALT NOT KILL;"
but how many followers or so-called followers, who call
themselves Christians, did exactly the opposite and trampled
on their own religion, by slaughtering either from their own
conviction or by order of a government, thousands of thou-
sands of innocent people. All those who order murder, or
kill human beings themselves, are no true Christians, (even
then, when doing so against their convictions).
The profession of their own belief is made a mockery
thereby.
63


Rather die than kill a human being (whether ordered to
do so or not), unless the innocent and defenseless babe or
woman or invalid or anybody who is at the mercy of a physi-
cal or mental fiend has to be protected by main force; and if
that unintentionally should cause death to the aggressor, you
are innocent; otherwise you are guilty.
What expresses the Divine vibrations of the Soul and
the Divine invisible Self more powerfully than words?
The true musical voice of the people, and the highest
class of melodic and harmonic sound with human Soul:
"TRUE MUSIC!"
The majesty of true music is overpowering; it charms;
it thrills; it suffers with humanity; it creates joy; it con-
quers anger; music speaks from heart to heart; from soul to
soul.
True music is consolation and bliss to the heart, to the
soul and to the spirit; true music, hand in hand with the in-
tention and hope to live a better life, gives the most power-
ful strength.
"True Music is Divine!"
OH SUPER-TRUTH!
Great blind force; innocent cause of thyself; Eternal
Origin and Might above Time, Space, The Universe, Na-
ture, Life, Death and Immortality—
Thy unconscious purity inspires us; the unconscious
just law of inevitable effect following each cause which again
must cause unavoidable events, whether disturbing, horrible,
or pleasing, is an uncreated, unborn, undying true or holy
law, to which we must submit; yet, in the midst of sorrow
we find consolation in the Earthly and Spiritual Heaven with
which we are surrounded:
The beauties of Nature;
The abundance of Nature;
The happiness of true Friendship;
The bliss of true Love, in spirit and body;
The touch of the sympathetic, loving hand;
64


The blessing of true sympathy, when the heart and the
soul and the body are suffering untold agonies. And should
we be forsaken by the world, or all alone and helpless, there
always are some true hearts who feel our sufferings deeply
with us, and whose souls are as closely in sympathy with
the unknown as with the known sufferer.
OH TRUTH! who canst reason through the agency of
the Universal human brain all through endless space, which
makes Thee "spiritual" within ourselves:
Through human consciousness and reason Thou chang-
est into an inner voice, which speaks to us in ourselves and
through others; a voice, our own divine voice in ourselves,
which always helps us to try again and again when we fail;
a voice which will help us to be just to ourselves as well as
to others; a voice which will give us strength to take all in-
evitable events as they must come;
"THE VOICE OF TRUTH"
"THE BEST IN OURSELVES."
"GOD IN MAN!"
65


Looking back and looking Forward
to
"THE MIGHT OF TRUTH."
We know now:
Whence we came, whither we are going, and "the in-
evitable" why we exist.
We know that we are in this world:
To suffer because it is unavoidable:
To enjoy because it is unavoidable;
To be just to others as well as ourselves, because jus-
tice satisfies the inevitable longing for "Peace" in our hearts.
We know that this longing for peace in general exists, be-
cause
"PEACE is total balance,"
the longing for which is unavoidable, because it is the oppo-
site of chaos or unbalance, which (the latter), in consequence
of the inevitable gravitation, must be followed by peace or
equalized currents.
We know that we all sprung from the same cause and
the different currents, by which we are constantly drawn
into the currents of chaos and peace, which we cannot es-
cape.
We also know that we can learn to control these cur-
rents to a great extent and to the best of our ability by will-
power or self-grasping (self-conscious) attraction and re-
pulsion.
66


And what will help us to attain peace in our hearts, al-
though we are living in an atmosphere of vice and corrup-
tion?
"UNSELFISHNESS."
Those men and women who preach by unselfish just
acts and true sympathy, (may they be poor or rich,
President, Laborer, King or Emperor), will establish
"THE PEACE OF THE WORLD"
in Mind, Heart, Soul and Land!
And what will become of the churches?
Will they become extinct after several generations?
On the contrary; that is to say:
If the word "Church" in a spiritual sense means: con-
solation in misery, consolation through truth, elevation of
the mind, the heart and the soul,—
Then the Church will become stronger every day; for
from the moment that the ministers become progressive and
go forth with the spirit of the times, from the moment that
they commence to appreciate more and more the scientific
inclinations of the present day (which look upon a con-
scious Creator, miracles, etc., as legends), inclinations,
which, notwithstanding science and logic, are longing for
sympathy, justice, love, heart and soul,
There will exist:
"THE UNITY OF SPIRIT"
for which mankind has been longing many thousands of
years,
the unity of spirit which will embrace the whole world
through
"THE MIGHT OF TRUTH."
67


INTERNATIONAL PEACE.
May the voice of Truth, Love for humanity and Justice
not only give consolation to bleeding hearts—but
May it also awake the understanding to all men that the
manufacturing of instruments of war is a crime allowed by
law.
May it give them the strength and courage to renounce
this occupation.
May it give strength and courage to all men of all
nationalities to stand up like one man against the command:
"Thou shalt kill."
May all governments—inside of fifty years—unite in
declaring the manufacturing, sale and use of all death-dealing
instruments (especially made with the brutal purpose of killing
human beings and destroying property), unlawful acts, punish-
able by life-long imprisonment.
May it change all instruments of slaughter and destruc-
tion into structures of industry and progress.
May it urge all men of all nations to clasp hands for the
sake of international prosperity and happiness.
May an endless chain or wave of these views all through
the world do more than anything else to end war with all its
horrors.
May mental courage in the cause of Truth prevail not
only in this case, but in everything else where mental courage
and strength of character are needed to stand up for one's
convictions.
68


THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY
OF
PROGRESSIVES.
MEMBERSHIP.
Every person is considered to be a member who is con-
vinced,
First: That "TRUTH" is equal to "GOD" as a non-
personal, self-evident, unborn and undying Might.
Second: That "TRUTH" is the Cause of the Uni-
verse and all Existence.
Third: That "TRUTH" becomes conscious of itself
through the human brains all through the Universe, and—
when conscious—IS A DIVINE INDIVIDUALITY or
PERSONALITY in every human being.
BRANCHES.
Every city or town where there are several members,
is considered a branch.
AIMS.
The different members according to their station in life
will form societies amongst themselves for the furtherance
of enlightment, human sympathy, justice, progress, pros-
perity and general happiness.
DUES.
To become a member dues are neither exacted nor ex-
pected.
69














6101^10535
B89094610235A
4 •••»


L



Ae10,mklD235
b89094610235a
